© Roger-Viollet, Pans
BY TAHAR BEN JELLOUN
Tangier a gateway to Africa, and a



window on Europe still draws sus¬
tenance from its myths and legends,
even though the city has expanded,
looks different and no longer recognizes its
children. This is the fate of places marked by
transience, the crossroads of history and
rumour. A point of departure (of escape) and
arrival, a port for easy dreams and uncertain
journeys, Tangier no longer knows what to do
with its reputation. The deeds and misdeeds
ascribed to it are legion; so too are the clichés
and fiendish images it has given rise to, and
the fractured prose and obscure poetry it has
inspired. It has been painted in every possible
colour, and evoked in salons and galleries so
often that it has become a ghost dressed in
shabby silk, a crumpled postcard not fit to
be sent to a friend waiting in the faraway cold.
A year after the death of Marco Polo, Ibn
Batuta, who was known as "the prince of trav¬
ellers", left Tangier on 14 June 1325 (he was
born there in 1304) on the journeys that
would take him several times round the then
known world. He did not often feel homesick
for the city, but he was haunted by its image.
Its perfumes and smells followed him every¬
where, conjuring up the memory of a peaceful
community where nothing untoward ever
occurred. He wrote that Morocco, "the land
where I wore the amulets of childhood and
where the dust first touched my skin", was
the best of all countries. In the travel note¬
books (Rihla) which he dictated, there were
few references to Tangier, which had not yet
become a crossroads. It was above all a port
from which people set out to explore the
world or seek adventure.
G Thepainter's eye
In 1832, Eugene Delacroix stayed in Tangier
before going on to Meknès, Fez and other
places. He was welcomed everywhere and did
not conceal his surprise or his sense of won¬
der. "I have now arrived in Tangier," he noted.
"I have just made a tour of the city and I am
full of astonishment at all I have seen. I would
need twenty arms, and days forty-eight hours
10
THE UNESCO QjURlElRH "MARCH 1997

Left, Avenue d'Espagne
in the 1930s.
Jewish Wedding in Morocco
(1839), oil on canvas by
Eugène Delacroix.
long, to give an account of it all. ... At the
moment, I am like a man in a dream who sees
things which he fears will escape his grasp	"
Through the good offices of Abraham
Benchimol, an interpreter at the French Con¬
sulate, he was able to obtain an introduction
to Jewish society in Tangier which gave him the
opportunity to paint his celebrated Jewish
Wedding. In a letter to his friend Pierret dated
25 January 1832, he wrote: "The Jewish
women arc admirable. I am afraid that it would
be difficult to do anything but paint them:
they are pearls of Eden".
Later on, another French painter, Henri
Matisse, came to Tangier, where he stayed at the
Hôtel Villa de France. At first, torrential rain¬
fall kept him confined to his room. Since he
had come for the sun and the light, he almost
gave in to disappointment and thought of
returning to France. Fortunately, he decided to
stay until the weather turned fine. That year,
1912, marked a new direction and dimension
in his work. The light of Tangier was a revela¬
tion to him.
Other painters have spent time in Tangier.
Today the Chilean Claudio Bravo lives and
works there. He seldom emerges from his
beautiful house at the foot of the "Vieille
Montagne" and he paints the people and
objects of Tangier in a hyper-realistic manner
which cannot be reduced to orientalism or
exoticism. Claudio Bravo paints the meeting of
two civilizations. He turns this place into a
crossroads where different ways of seeing and
being, different visions of the world and sen¬
sibilities, and a mix of different temperaments
all confront each other. In fact, his attraction
and respect for Moroccan popular culture have
made it virtually the main subject of his work.
I An international city
For some forty years, until 1957, Tangier had
the status of an international city. What did
that mean for its inhabitants? Although it had
a representative of the royal authority, the city
was administered by several different countries.
However, the most widely spoken language,
apart from Arabic, was Spanish, and the most
widely used currency was the peseta. Other cur¬
rencies could be exchanged in booths on the
rue Siaghinc, between the jewellers and the
bazaar stall-holders. There were as many schools
as there were countries represented in the city.
Young Moroccans had the choice between the
Spanish Institute and the Italian school, the
E Unesco Kurier march 1997 11


in the past compose nostalgic laments for a
Tangier which no longer exists.
American school and the French lycée. At this
time cosmopolitanism was a lifestyle, multi-
lingualism was not encumbered by the problem
of identity, and the Muslims of Tangier lived in
the same neighbourhoods as the Christians and
the Jews. The Calle Sevilla was known as the
Spaniards' street, but Muslims lived in the same
buildings sidc-by-side with the Spaniards and
there was no feeling of mistrust between the
two. It was a time when Moroccans wondered
how nearby Spain, a fairly poor country, could
be capable of colonizing them. They did not ask
this question about the French, who did not
mix with the others and often behaved in an
overbearing manner.
This period when the city had an interna¬
tional status witnessed the arrival of more
traffickers, gangsters, forgers and insolvent
or ruined businessmen than artists. Yet the
1 950s were prolific years for the group of Beat
Generation poets who discovered Tangier and
turned it into a centre for writing, pick-ups
and a total change of scene. Allen Ginsberg,
William Burroughs, Jack Kerouac, Lawrence
Ferlinghetti, Paul Bowles and Tennessee
Williams all came together to smoke hash,
party and improvise poetry performances.
Jean Genet did not mix with this set, even
though he knew most of the poets. He did not
like Tangier, which he compared to the French


Riviera And yet he wrote in The Thief'sJour¬
nal: "This city (Tangier) represented Betrayal
for me so well and so magnificently that I felt
I had no option but to come ashore here".
How did a gathering place of travellers,
traders, diplomats, gangsters and exiles come
to symbolize what Jean Genet called
"Betrayal"? It is probably because this port
opening on the West, washed by two seas, the
Atlantic and the Mediterranean, this myth
which still preserves some Roman remains,
this route to other places, is a stage where life
and death are played out, where old actors
take refuge in retirement, where writers fixed
eneral view of Tangier.
i café in the Socco
district.
M,larketscene
in the casbah, the high
part of town.
¡Fading romance
This memory of a city with its special status
still finds a refuge among people of another
age, outlasting the dampness of the tired walls,
the gusts of the East wind and the eternal
spirit of hope which one day will save Tang¬
ier from decay. It is in this sense that the city
is romantic, destined to appear in works of
fiction or fantasies stalked by mystery.
Over the past thirty years, until a major
clean-up campaign was launched early in 1 996, a
parallel clandestine economy linked to "mint"
(kif) trafficking was concentrated in Tangier.
Traffickers, smugglers and even government
officials were arrested and tried. At the same
time, a relentless struggle began against the smug¬
glers of human beings: people trying to emi¬
grate. Tangier had become the last stage for those
who hoped to cross the straits of Gibraltar and
find work in Spain or elsewhere. People came
Bit
THE UNESCO ÍOURIERB MARCH 1997

from all over, from southern Morocco and even
from certain African countries, to embark at
night on boats belonging to unscrupulous
fishermen.
The city has grown. So-called "popular and
spontaneous" new districts have mushroomed
on the outskirts. Beni Makada, which was a
huge shantytown, has become an almost new
M scene in the medina,
the old town.
Ihe port
seen from the medina.
and respectable quarter, where the buildings are
now all solidly built. Casabarata is no longer
a shantytown, either. Tangier is no longer con¬
fined to the old city, the Casbah, Marshan and
the cattle market the residential area along
the road to the "Grande Montagne". Tangier
is spreading in length and breadth. The city's
old families arc isolated and in a minority. Per¬
haps that is why they arc not managing to
make their voices heard and to fight for the
future of their city.



Tangier is starting to lose its identity as a
crossroads, a place of trade and cross-fertil¬
ization, and is coming to resemble any other
modern Moroccan city. Fortunately, there arc
artists, most of them foreign, who still have
a passion for the city. Some of them live there
permanently, others come several times a year.
Neither they nor the people of the city can
understand or explain the attraction for this
port which can often seem shabby or com¬
monplace. Someone encapsulated this feeling
in the phrase: "I can't explain why I love this
city, but I know why I don't love it! " Appar¬
ently, love wins over everything else and peo¬
ple keep coming in spite of the wind and the
decay, the annoyances of everyday life and the
spectacle of a city adrift.
THE UNESCO Ç)URltR1 MARCH 1097 13
