BY JEAN-FRANÇOIS PATRICOLÄ
In Sicily the eye is constantly drawn upwards by natural and
man-made stairways that etch the urban and rural landscape
Pantalica in Sicily's Iblci mountains,
its necropolis and troglodytic vil¬
lages with their thousands of niches
hewn from the rock long ago like
so many irregular steps.
Caltagirone (Qal'at al-Gîran in Ara¬
bic) and its flight of a hundred and forty-
two steps finely adorned with majolica
which leads up to the church and exem¬
plifies the tradition of ascent that has been
transmitted from generation to genera¬
tion in Sicily. For the festival of San Gia-
como in July it is illuminated by thou¬
sands of candles and lanterns, nocturnal
sentinels on the sculpted mountain,
which very small children light when
they hear a signal a whistle from the
capomastro.
Greek and Roman theatres at Syra¬
cuse and Taormina, their broad terraces
still thronged with spectators who come
to watch and listen to operas and
tragedies, with purple velvet cushions
which they hire at the entrance when
paying for their seats.
Richly ornate churches reflected in
their gleaming steps, inviting pilgrims and
tourists to climb painfully upwards
beneath the cruel sun.
Alleys whose every doorfront has one
step, sometimes two, where people sit
out on their chairs to enjoy the cool
evening air and chat with their neigh¬
bours. Alleys with tiny staircases which
might conceal an assassin or a couple of
timid lovers.
Left, the fountain on
Piazza Pretoria in
Palermo (Sicily). It
was built between
1555 and 1575.
flight, alley steps in
Taormina, on Sicily's
east coast.
U pposite page
above, a flight of steps
in Taormina, which for
25 centuries has
overlooked the Ionian
Sea from the foot of
Mount Etna.
on

The sculpted walls of the Alcantara
gorges, like monochromatic piano keys,
overlapping like so many steps that
Orpheus might have taken to reach his
beloved.
The Gorges of Tiberio, also known as
the Proserpine abyss, with their rocky
sides chiselled out like a titanic natural
staircase leading down into the bowels
of the earth.
In Sicily, everything climbs upwards.
The silence ofascent
The baroque cathedrals of Noto and
Ragusa, with polished steps so imposing
that they give a foretaste of the divine,
so wide that they overwhelm the reli¬
gious building to which they lead. The
Latomian quarries with steps eaten away
by the centuries; catacombs with seeping
moss-covered steps. All these steps cap¬
tivate walkers who, once they have set
foot on them, can no longer resist the
temptation to ascend or descend.
A mysterious power of attraction
emanates from these stone platforms,
which are, because of their size and
width, an extension of the marketplace
where people meet, stare or gaze long¬
ingly at one another. A real-life theatre
of mime, of smorfia the art of the gri¬
mace and facial sign-language and opera

deipupi, the puppet theatre that retraces
the history of the Sicilian people, from
the lordly paladin who stood out against
the invader, to the labourer exploited by
rich land-owners.
People sit on the steps and stare at the
passers-by who walk theatrically to and
fro beneath them, in long noisy pro¬
cessions, iridescent with a thousand
colours. A never-changing ballet. Silence
descends. The suffering of pilgrims lit¬
erally sweats blood as they climb the
steps on their knees, one after the other,
leaving there a little of themselves that
the tired and thirsty stone sucks in greed¬
ily. Eyes cast down, the bearers of the
sácred relics of San Corrado Confalonieri
and of other patron saints of large com-
Oteps inlaid with majolica
leading up to the church of
Santa Maria del Monte in
Caltagirone (Sicily).
^r$%
.,*: <+ ^ v.
munities Sant' Agata, Santa Lucia, San
Sebastiano strain with the effort of
walking with eight hundred kilos of silver
on their shoulders.
Dry stone walls streak fields with
pumice and obsidian, vineyards, Etna's
black and fertile slopes, fields of Barbary
fig trees, columns of olive and almond
trees transfixed in eternal poses. Like life¬
lines across the palm of the hand they
bear witness to life gone by and mark its
stages. Sometimes, in their rectitude, they
caress the contours of a hill, holding back
roots and water, snatching from the
unproductive soil a few strips of farm¬
land and forming terraces, huge steps
across the hillside for invisible cyclops
to climb.
Church steps
Past and present are expressed through
these steps hewn in limestone, lava and
obsidian, and through all the cultures that
meet there.
Clergy and notables, vine and grape,
pagans and fervent believers, clusters of
scarlet and black, mingle on the steps of
churches. All let their feelings show
when the sacred relics pass by. On
church steps on feast-day evenings, the
camminanti, the travelling people, so spe¬
cial in Sicily, are loquaciously present,
begging or selling, with their unique form
of speech, immense candles for the pro¬
cession. On the waxy or mossy steps
people move like little children afraid of
falling. They sway like fishermen scourg¬
ing the wine-dark sea by order of the rais,
the chief, and harpooning the tuna
imprisoned in the almazraba the net
the scene of another tragedy in which
the fish come to die. On church steps
people take stock of the world, seek a
reply when fate hounds their families,
when neither clerical cloth nor talisman
can cure the wounds of heart and soul.
First and last steps
Platforms, terraces and stairways are the
veins of Sicily through which flow tiny
trickles of sand and water. Life and death.
They are the first furrows of the field
ploughed, the first verses written, the
first steps taken in life, as the family stand¬
ing on steps after the wedding sows
unspoken love, mingling with the grains

.. ,_v 3 *
I he Roman theatre of
Segesta. It was hewn from the
rock on top of Mount Bárbaro
during the Hellenistic period
(3rd century B.C.).
of rice. But they are also life's last steps,
the steps leading to the tiered cemetery
whose hundreds of terraced crypts must
be scaled, step by step, for the last time.
Those who come to visit the dead in
the early morning, to avoid the heat of
the day, climb upwards as did the first
inhabitants the Sicani and the Siculi
and then the first invaders. Stage after
stage, step after step, penetrating inland,
settling there and recommencing the
eternal task without ever looking back¬
wards, until the stone steps are swal¬
lowed up, as they were at Netum the
once-splendid city of Noto, destroyed
by a terrible earthquake in 1693 by
brambles, Barbary fig trees, and heady
jasmin.
