The
chequered
fortunes
of Japan's
modern
drama
Shingeki's restless century
©J M Steinlein, Maison des cultures du monde, Pans
BYOHZASAYOSHIO*
Tue Watering Place, above,
was written and staged by the
Tenkei Gekijo company.
* People's names: following
Japanese custom, the
surname precedes the given
name. Ed.
There is a basic difference between classi¬
cal Japanese theatre and Shingeki or
"modern theatre", which emerged in the early
twentieth century under the influence of West¬
ern theatre. Classical theatre, which is performed
exclusively by men, is musical theatre with a
strong infusion of dance, unlike Shingeki,
which is purely verbal, a theatre of dialogue.
The traditional forms of Japanese classical
drama, Nô, Kabuki and Bunraku, are quite dis¬
tinct from each other and each one has its own
playhouses. There are Nô theatres (nôgakudo)
and Kabuki theatres, and Bunraku (a variant
of puppet theatre) is only performed on spe¬
cially designed stages. When Shingeki came
along, it created a need for Western-style play¬
houses in which the curtain divides the stage
from the audience. In response to the aesthet¬
ics of realism, women began appearing in plays
after centuries of banishment from the stage.
In theory neither traditional theatre nor
modern theatre, which politically speaking leans
to the left, receive state subsidies. National the¬
atres do exist Tokyo's National Kabuki The¬
atre (founded in 1969), the National Puppet
Theatre of Osaka, the Theatre of Traditional
Arts, Tokyo's Nô Theatre and the New
National Theatre created in 1 997 for ballet and
opera but with the exception of the Osaka
Puppet Theatre they do not have permanent
companies. There is no national theatre school.
In 1990 however, the state created the Soci¬
ety for the Encouragement of Arts and Let¬
ters which defrays part of the costs of theatre,
music and dance performances. This was the
first official state contribution to the theatre.
Support also comes from two long-established
theatre companies, Shôshiku, which finances
Kabuki performances, and Tôhô, which
together with other private companies have
funded the construction of numerous theatres.
Shôshiku and Tôhô producers stage sepa¬
rate Shingeki performances by recruiting actors
to work with the major stars of theatre, cinema
and television. This is what is known as com¬
mercial theatre. The avowed aim of these per¬
formances, which are held in theatres that can seat
from 1,000 to 2,000 people, is to make profit.
The traditional compartmentalization of
different types of theatre is not totally water¬
tight. Some Kabuki actors act in new produc¬
tions in films and on television, even including
r 3

Left, the two tramps in
Samuel Beckett's Waiting (or
Godot in a 1960 Tokyo
production by the Buragaku-za
(The Company of Letters).
American and British musical comedies. In the
last few years musical comedies mainly adap¬
tations of Western works have become increas¬
ingly popular. A show can attract tens of thou¬
sands of people and run for up to a year.
Takarazuka is a celebrated all-female review
and musical comedy company whose reper¬
tory includes works such as Oklahoma, Me
and my GzV/and Grand Hotel as well as Japan¬
ese works based on popular comic strips like
the well-known Berusayu no bara ("The Roses
of Versailles") which has entertained millions
of spectators. This company, which aims
largely at a female audience, still has an immense
following today.
Born again Shingeki
During Japan s militarist period before the Sec¬
ond World War, Shingeki was repressed, and
by the summer of 1945 only one company was
left the Bungaku-za ("The Company of Let¬
ters"), which had been founded in 1937. Dur¬
ing the democratization process initiated by
the American authorities, Shingeki came back to
life as popular theatre. Newly founded around
directors such as Aoyama Sugisaku::' and Senda
Koreeya, the Haiyû-za (Actors Theatre) Com¬
pany in 1946 staged Kensatsukan, a Japanese
version of Gogol's Revisor (The Inspector
General). After reforming his company,
Shînkyôgekidan, which he had been forced to
break up, Murayama Tomoyoshi returned to
the theatre in the same year with Kofuku no
îe, a production of Vladimir Fedorov's The
20
* THE
House of Happiness. Kubo Sakae, one of
Shingeki's great playwrights, inaugurated the
Tokyo Geijutsu Gekijô (the Tokyo Art The¬
atre) with actors including Takizawa Osamu,
and made a new departure in the same year with
Ibsen's A Doll's House. A number of leading
theatre people joined the communist party
(newly recognized as a political party) and, as
before the war, made it their duty to spread its
message through the theatre.
By 1948 the great figures of pre-war Shingeki
had already made their come-back. Some new
plays, such as Miyoshi Jurô's Sono hito o shirazu
("You don't know this man") and Tanaka
Shikao's Kumo no hatate ("At the end of the
clouds"), depicted post-war life. Others like
Kinoshita Junji's Yûzuru ("Twilight of a
Crane"), staged by the Budô no kai company,
and Onna no isshô ("The Life of a Woman"),
performed by the Bungaku-za company,
became classics of the modern repertory.
The year 1950 was a turning-point in post¬
war history. The Cold War between the United
States and the former Soviet Union had settled
in. When war broke out in nearby Korea, anti-
communist purges in Japan spared neither the
cinema nor the theatre. One Shingeki com¬
pany, the Haiyû-za, built a small theatre in
1954 (the Haiyû-za gekijô) where it staged
Onna no heiwa, a production of Aristo¬
phanes' Women in Parliament. It is still
unusual today for a Shingeki company to have
its own theatre; most of the time they hire
theatres for their plays.

The Haiyû-za became the leading Shingeki
theatre when in 1949 it founded its own train¬
ing centre, which came to provide it and other
companies with a plentiful supply of actors.
Shiki, a company founded by Asari Kcita and
Kusaka Takeshi, reappraised the approach
which had presided over the origins of
Shingeki, that of Stanislavsky-inspired real¬
ism. It specialized in the plays of Jean Girau¬
doux and Jean Anouilh, which had very rarely
been staged in Japan. In 1955, the Bungaku-za
(Literary Theatre) Company had a hit with
Hamlet in a version translated and directed
by Fukuda Tsuneari. Shakespeare is the most
widely performed playwright in Japan. In
terms of the number of performances per
author, he shares first place with the Kabuki
playwright Kawatake Miluami. The diversity
and depth of his work are a source of endless
fascination to theatre lovers.
One important feature of post-war Shingeki
was the introduction of Bertolt Brecht's plays
and theories of drama. Brecht's Fear and Mis¬
ery ofthe Third Reich was first staged in Japan
by Senda Koreeya with the Haiyû-za yôscisho
(School of Dramatic Art) in 1953. Debate about
Brecht's ideas on drama went hand in hand
with questioning about the renewal of the
modern world through theatre.
In 1957, for the first time in the history
of a Shingeki company, the Bungaku-za used
Kabuki actors in a Fukuda Tsuneari play
(Akechi Mitsubide). The first tour of Japan by
the Moscow Art Theatre the following year
had a tremendous impact. It marked the start
of a wave of tours by famous foreign com¬
panies that began to develop in the second half
of the 1970s.
Les Misérables, a musical
comedy adapted from Victor
Hugo's novel, being performed
at Tokyo's Imperial Theatre
(1997).
Notes from underground
Women's time has come,
a play for the commercial
theatre staged in Tokyo
by the all-female Takarazuka
company.
While big demonstrations against the renewal
of the security treaty with the United States
were taking place in 1960, Bungaku-za brought
the theatre of the absurd to Japan with their
production of Samuel Beckett's Waiting for
Godot. The play hinted that, like Godot, the
change long awaited by part of public opinion
would not appear. ... A series of plays by
Beckett and Eugene Ionesco were produced
around this time, which also saw the first per¬
formances of Shingeki outside Japan.
The events of spring 1960 also left their
mark on the world of Shingeki. The author¬
ity of the major companies such as Haiyû-za,
Bungaku-za and Mingei began to be ques¬
tioned and new companies critical of their pre¬
decessors emerged. This was a period of intense
experimentation and creative activity. Doubts
about the traditional left were accompanied
by criticism of Shingeki.
The aim behind this experimentation was
to create a different theatre from Shingeki,
and renewal took an extreme form in 1967
with a Karagumi (situationist theatre) per¬
formance. In the same year the Tenjôsajiki
r Í

company (The Gallery Company) broke new
ground as part of the drive for "the rehabili¬
tation of theatre". Faces wearing way-out
Kabuki make-up appeared on stage and pop
songs announced that Shingeki was a thing of
the past. A world of human folly was por¬
trayed in an atmosphere of utter confusion.
Put out of their stride by the emergence of
such a different kind of theatre, critics soon
dubbed it Angura ("underground").
Each underground company had its own
special features, but they all shared a belief in
the need to destroy the traditional perception
of theatre and staging, in the importance of the
actor's role, in a new approach to Nô and
Kabuki, in the abandonment of realism and in
exploration of the human unconscious.
The Tenjôsajiki company, directed by Tcr-
ayama Shûji, staged many bold experiments,
changing its use of space and stagecraft with
each performance. For Nokku, street theatre,
in 1975, Terayama transformed Tokyo's Sug-
A scene from Kabuki, one of
the classic forms of Japanese
theatre, directed by Oguri
Hangan(1997).
inami district into a vast stage, injecting dra¬
matic structure into daily life and obliterating
the boundaries between reality and fiction.
The action took place in thirty different places
at once, making it impossible for one specta¬
tor to see the entire show.
Strolling Dreamers
Starting in the 1970s young playwrights, direc¬
tors and actors influenced by Angura founded
a host of small companies which took their cue
from the main trends of contemporary theatre.
Among the most influential figures were
Tsuka, who cynically examined the foibles of
Japan and the Japanese, and Higashi, the author
of a musical comedy, Tokyo Kid Brothers.
Angura abolished the distinction between
author, director and company manager, a move
that came to be widely followed.
Japanese society in the 1980s became highly
prosperous and experienced the euphoria of
running the world's second biggest economy
after the United States. Concern about the
unemployment of young people disappeared,
and so did anxiety about the economic future
This was the context which gave rise to Noda
Hideki with his Company of Strolling
Dreamers (Yume no Yûminsha) and Kôkami
Shôji with his Third Stage (Dai san butai).
One distinctive feature of their style is the
absence of any "ordinary" people from the
stage. The heroes arc young people of inde¬
terminate social background. In its stagecraft
and its language this kind of theatre jumps
from one form to another. It turns away from
Angura's dark, brooding expressiveness and
stages shows full of light music and dancing,
in which sensitivity is the keynote. This form
of theatre, very different from Shingeki and
Angura, attracts crowds of young spectators
from all social classes. Many companies have
taken part in this kind of experimentation.
In the 1990s, however, most of the com¬
panies practising this type of theatre have had
chequered careers. The Company of Strolling
Dreamers no longer exists. The playwrights
of note are those who have gone back to every¬
day life and language. This marks a return to
early Shingeki. Independent playwrights are
making a come-back, and young authors are
producing their works with established
Shingeki companies. Whether these play¬
wrights work independently or not, I feel
that contemporary Japanese theatre is once
again at a turning point. M
