The mixed signals of globalization
BY SALAH GUEMRICHE Ahardlookatthe impact ofsatellite
communication on the South
Mbove, spreading
the news in the traditional way
(Fez, Morocco).
nee upon a time ideas circulated on
| foot, as part of people's baggage.
Later, the invention of writing and
the spread of literacy transformed
the very nature of human relationships, per¬
ceptions and knowledge of the world. Today
ideas spread largely via radio and television.
The increase in the number of data banks and
the global reach of the Internet are bound to
multiply and diversify modes of access to
information.
The abolition of frontiers and the advent
of the "global village" through the spread of
audiovisual communication, which was no
more than a Utopian dream in the 1960s, is
now on the way to becoming a reality. But is
not this vision, which underlay the theories of
the Canadian sociologist Marshall McLuhan,
the same as that which today provides the ide¬
ological basis of "globalization"?
In the 1 980s a broad consensus crystallized
around the bold ideas advanced in France by
Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, who was con¬
vinced that technology was going to "take us
from the neolithic age to the post-industrial
age". In the post-independence ferment the
developing countries systematically opted for
massive technological investment in institu¬
tional communications, and decision-makers
in the West believed that the "working masses"
could be made technology-minded by decree,
like people treated in a vaccination campaign.
After having to compete with the wireless
and the transistor, then being sidelined by

television, traditional communication by
word of mouth was pilloried as a symptom of
underdevelopment and scornfully treated by
the written press. The fact is that this versatile,
time-honoured way of spreading informa¬
tion spells danger to any established order.
Immune to the cold rationalism of media sys¬
tems, the spoken word is a versatile and
uncheckablc way of transmitting subversive
ideas. It is also a means whereby society can
restructure itself.
In societies with an oral tradition, com¬
munication based on the primacy of words
over all other forms of representation is one of
the basic ingredients of popular culture. Radio
benefitted from this status and gradually
became accepted because the spoken word
broadcast by radio nurtures the oral tradi¬
tion when it does not compete with it
rather than denying or trivializing it. But the
basic effect of television is to trivialize. This
inclines us to believe that, unlike the televi¬
sion viewers of the industrialized societies
studied by McLuhan, viewers who are heirs to
an oral tradition will be unsatisfied rather than
fascinated by the TV image. They will miss
the way in which the spoken word alone was
once used to conjure up form, image and
colour. The televised image dispossesses the
spoken word of its descriptive powers.
Today every household in the world is
within reach of a satellite. Some developing
countries even have their own satellites, not as
instruments of emancipation but as adjuncts
of sovereignty, a means of monitoring ideas
that come from elsewhere.
M carpet designer in
Turkmenistan works on a
computerized pattern.
M cybercafé In Cape Town
(South Africa).
I Interference or competition?
The development of media networks, the pur¬
chase of parabolic dishes and the lure of
escapism combine to entice people who are
tired of unimaginative programmes produced
in their own countries to tunc in to more sen¬
sational programmes beamed from elsewhere.
Images created in the North often represent
values contrary to those of the people in the
South, and present characters, situations and
living conditions that are light years away fro m
their experience. Nonetheless a wide range of
audiences all over the world are swayed by the
adventures of the same heroes of the same tele¬
vision series. The only possible explanation for
this is the fact that these shows arc considered
as consumer goods and awaited and received
as such.
It is sometimes said that young people in
developing countries have more in common
with their Western counterparts than they do
with their own parents. Should we deduce fro m
this that we are heading towards a community
of references and ideas that transcend frontiers ?
To do so would be to forget the perverse effects
that are already beginning to appear. Is it not
more likely that the discrepancy between these
two modes of representation will sow dishar¬
mony and, eventually, schizophrenia and other
forms of mental conflict?
It would nonetheless be too simplistic to
see this phenomenon as the only expression of
the North's hold on the South. In the 1980s
Third World experts urged developing coun¬
tries to co-operate among themselves, convinced
that this would provide "the miraculous solu¬
tion that would put an end to unequal exchanges
and enshrine the advent of truly democratic
international relations, i A survey we carried
out in 1984 on the Afro-Arab programme for
audiovisual co-operation revealed a tendency
among certain partners under the guise of fine-
sounding principles of solidarity to continue
the former relationship of domination for
^ which the former colonial power was criticized.

But there is a big danger that the eternal
reflex that leads some to denounce interfer¬
ence by others in their internal affairs may
soon lose its familiar landmarks. As the South¬
ern countries themselves become producers
of communication technologies, the expan¬
sionism they complained of for so long will
gradually become interpénétration.
The drums ofcyberspace
The issues raised by the traditional media
focused on the abolition of political fron¬
tiers in the interests of further "integration".
The issues raised by Internet involve the abo¬
lition of ideological frontiers and the stan¬
dardization of behaviour and ideas. Nelson
Thall, a disciple of Marshall McLuhan,
believes that the Internet's unavowed design
is to get "the whole world to think and write
like North Americans'".
This is not integration but assimilation.
It is certainly not what most users expect. For
them the Internet is rather a means of
"improving the dialogue between countries
and between individuals spread around the
globe".2 They are not looking to the Net to
escape reality but for a reality that is likely to
improve their quality of life at work and play.
As we said above, ideas once travelled in
people's baggage. Today they travel predomi¬
nantly via the airwaves and new communica¬
tion technologies. What is carried by the air¬
waves, of course, are the values of the society
that produces them. Democracy is one of those
values. The noble paradox inherent in transna¬
tional flows that are hegemonistic by nature is
that they subliminally transmit, albeit
through an ideological filter, the message of
freedom and human rights. And people can
feel that they are citizens of the world when
they know often in "real time" what is
happening on the other side of the globe.
Since its massive penetration of the
remotest regions, television has gradually
opened people's eyes to their own living con¬
ditions by showing them those of other peo¬
ples around the world. This awareness always
disturbs governments. Much criticism can be
levelled at these airwaves beamed from else¬
where, but at least they have helped to sow
the seeds of democratic aspirations that cannot
be stifled. It remains to be seen what deposits
they will leave in the collective memory of
tomorrow.
1 In A. and M. Mattclart, X. Dclcourt, La culture contre
la democratic? L'audiovisuel à l'heure transnationale.
La Découverte publishers, Paris, 1983. See our
contribution to this work, pp. 96, 104.
2 In Etats de la Francophonie dans le monde 1995/1996,
Paris, Documentation française, 1997.
Wo' ord and ¡mage.
Bedouin in the desert (Syria).
