REFLECTIONS
Spreading the word
by Odón Vallet
Retracing the
highways and
byways taken
by the world's
great religious
ideas (See the
June 1997
issue, 'How
ideas travel').
Just as a rumour spreads from street to
street, so "good news" (which is the
meaning of the word "gospel") can travel
from village to village, from oasis to oasis, and
in this way cover thousands of kilometres
without its bearers needing to travel them¬
selves. In Black Africa, the prophet Muham¬
mad's message was conveyed from one water-
hole to the next, and Islam spread southwards
in this way without the Faithful ever having
to leave their native region.
For thousands of years, religions have been
propagated in this way, by capillary action
rather than by transplantation, and their his¬
tory has been shaped by the gradual spread of
influences as much as by brutal invasions. To
take one example, the face of the Buddha,
which was never portrayed in early Buddhism,
made its appearance early in the Christian era
in Gandhara art (in what is now Pakistan),
which represents it with the features of a
Greek Adonis or a mustachioed warrior.
Seen from Europe, and especially from its
Western marches, all religions seem to origi¬
nate in the Orient: first the Greek and Roman
religions, then Judaism, Christianity and Islam,
which came from the Near East. But seen from
the eastern extremities of Asia, all religions
inevitably come from the West. China, Korea
and Japan received Buddhism from India, and
Indonesia received Islam from Arabia. Jôdo,
the Pure Land of Amidist Buddhism practised
in Japan, lies in the West and it is to the West
that Indonesian Muslims turn to pray.
Paths of peace and war
The great religions spread along paths that
were by turns peaceful and warlike. Buddhist
monks and Muslim traders propagated the
message of their respective religions along the
silk route. Mithraism (an Iranian religion
which grew out of Zoroastrianism), Judaism
and Christianity were Eastern religions that
spread along Roman roads. Islam travelled on
horseback up through Spain and through
France as far as Poitiers. On the roads of
Greece stelae dedicated to Hermes were
replaced by statues of St. Christopher. With
the progress of navigation, Buddhism spread
along the coasts of China and Indochina. From
the sixteenth century onwards, European
ships carrying monks, soldiers and settlers
took Christianity to the continents of Amer¬
ica, Africa and Asia.
The purpose of religions is twofold: they
try to spread a message and to unite a com¬
munity around that message. In a sense, all
religions are "catholic" in the etymological
meaning of the word (i.e. "universal"). Even
Judaism has been taken to the four corners of
the earth by the diaspora of emigrant or
exiled Jews. Hinduism draws its origins from
the common heritage of Indo-European reli¬
gions and is beginning to expand to all five
continents. Yoga, born of the Indian tradi¬
tion, is now practised by many Westerners.
A coherent message
In the ancient Greek city-state, on the other
hand, the local religion was reserved for citi¬
zens alone. That is the principle of religions
for initiates, esoteric cults which, in a period
of globalization of trade and blending of
beliefs, are experiencing a renewal to which
the proliferation of sects bears witness today.
According to the two Latin etymologies of the
word sect (sequi, to follow and secare, to cut),
believers follow a charismatic leader and
break with the main or dominant religious
movements.
A religion must possess a certain degree of
coherence before it can expand. Beliefs must

be harmonized so that they can be distributed
as widely as possible and passed on to future
generations through families and schools. The
secular authorities are bound to be involved
in these attempts to promote harmony against
schismatic movements and heretical doctrines
because they alone possess the necessary legal
and economic resources. The Christian faith
was spread by the apostle Paul, who had a
vital safe-conduct, his Roman citizenship,
which saved him from execution by the local
authorities. Then it acquired official status
at the instigation of Emperor Constantine who
in 32 A.D. convened the Nicene Council, which
promulgated dogmas of orthodoxy that still
obtain today. On the Buddhist front the Indian
King Asoka seems to have convened a similar
Council (at Pataliputra, in the mid-third cen¬
tury A.D.) to reduce doctrinal differences
between monasteries.
The dissemination of religions, like that
of secular ideologies, requires both the
putting down of roots and propagation. In this
regard the work of St. Paul is remarkable.
He deepened the Christian doctrine and dis¬
seminated it through his epistles, while
46 r
W THE UNESCO V^OURIER «OCTOBER 1997
regarding himself as an "apostle", a title
which in the Athenian city-state designated
the head of a diplomatic mission or a mar¬
itime expedition.
Religion and global
communications
By turns nomadic and sedentary, faiths first
travelled on foot. Buddha, Jesus and Muham¬
mad were great walkers who delivered their
messages on camp-sites and recruited disci¬
ples at every halt. As these messages became
religions they assumed immobile form in pago¬
das, churches and mosques. Today, stupas,
bell towers and minarets rise skywards like
so many lighthouses to guide the earthly trav¬
eller. Sometimes, the age-old solidity of these
places of worship that are resistant even to
earthquakes and radically changing life-styles
leads to ossification, parochialism and a
refusal to engage in dialogue.
Today modern technology can help indi¬
viduals both to become rooted in their own
convictions and to become receptive to the
beliefs of others. Coverage of the Pope's jour¬
neys is beamed all over the world. Imams
Extracts from the Qur'an are
read at the burial of a Uygur in
Kashgar, north-western China.

record their sermons on cassettes for believ¬
ers in other countries, and religious broad¬
casts can be picked up from distant coun¬
tries via satellite dishes.
Thanks to air travel, Catholics and Mus¬
lims from all over the world make pilgrimages
to Lourdes or Mecca. Kathmandu airport has
opened Himalayan Buddhism to the West,
and Denpasar airport has done the same thing
for Balinese Hinduism.
As a result of modern technology the reli¬
gious message is now communicated world¬
wide with the same audiovisual accuracy. The
time is past when story-tellers could embroider
the sacred stories and copyists amend the
scriptures. Could the founder of a religion
today, a true prophet, adjust to the transmis¬
sion of his message in real time? After all, the
microphone and video camera seem to bring
fame while abolishing mystery. Churches have
their crypts and monasteries their precincts:
there can be no religion, however open, without
secrets. Each sacred treasure is guarded by
iron bars and each spiritual path hides a
labyrinth.
Another aspect of technical progress con
sists of the pollution and nuisances of all kinds
which have led, by reaction, to the rise of
environmentalism, which is neither more nor
less than a scientific version of the old reli¬
gion of nature. It is no coincidence that the
first national parks were created in the late
nineteenth century in the American West (Yel¬
lowstone, Yosemite) where the Indians ven¬
erated the sun, the moon and the trees. In a
world which is becoming a dustbin, humanity
harks back to the old animist religions. It is
transforming nature into a sanctuary with
reserves as sacred enclosures. Tourists from all
over the world travel to Asia to venerate ele¬
phants, just as, in times past, people prayed
to Ganesh, the elephant god, son of Shiva. Or
else they go into ecstasy before birds which
evoke Garuda, the eagle with a man's body,
Vishnu's mount.
Those who believe in Heaven and those
who do not here join in the same movement to
safeguard creation which some prefer to
call the ecosystem threatened with destruc¬
tion by terrible exploitation. The blessed and
the infidel reach the same conclusion: we have
only one Earth. I
A candlelight procession in
Lourdes (France), a Catholic
pilgrimage site.
