The rock carvings in
Tanum in northern Bohuslan
(Sweden), were added to the
World Heritage List in 1994, as
an outstanding example of
Bronze Age art in Europe. The
composition of some of the
panels, notably those at
Fossum (right), is highly
complex and elaborate.
a vigilant
BY MARGARETA BIÖRNSTAD
When a site is placed on the World
Heritage List, that is not the end
of the story. If it is to stay on the
List, the characteristics and qualities
that justified its inscription must be preserved.
This means monitoring not only changes
that directly affect listed monuments and sites
but also changes in their management and
upkeep. Knowledge derived from monitor¬
ing is the necessary basis for a dialogue between
national heritage authorities and UNESCO. The
chief beneficiaries of such a process arc the
managers and other professionals who shoul¬
der the day-to-day responsibilities for world
heritage sites. It is they who are, or should be,
the most closely involved in discussions about
monitoring.
Managing a world heritage property is an
ever-changing task that calls not only for spe¬
cial knowledge of the site but for awareness of
what is going on around it and in society at
large. Site managers must always be ready to
cope with new situations such as the intro¬
duction of facilities for tourists, changes in
land-use or threats from pollution from indus¬
trial plants or cars. Positive developments also
need to be monitored. Co-operation with local
people can, for instance, open new possibili¬
ties for site protection and for participation in
tourism based on cultural values. Increased
interest from researchers can help to explain
cultural values and counteract threats to them.
It is often hard to detect changes on a day-
to-day basis, and those in charge of listed sites
need help. They need tools that will enable
them to check whether site management and
maintenance comply with commitments made
when the site was accepted for inclusion on
the World Heritage List.
A regular follow up and monitoring sys¬
tem can be such a tool, providing a fine-tun¬
ing mechanism for the overhaul of existing
management plans and the preparation of
action programmes for the future. Such a sys¬
tem could also lead to a constructive national
and international exchange of experience about
conservation methods and standards that
would increase awareness of the values of our
common heritage.
The Nordic countries have a tradition of
co-operation on matters of mutual interest.
This general rule, which applies to the selection
of sites for the World Heritage List, has been
extended to include monitoring since the
foundation of the Nordic World Heritage
Office in Oslo (Norway), and a plan for a sys¬
tematic survey of the Nordic items on the
List is now being drawn up. Once imple¬
mented, it should stimulate greater public
interest in the cultural heritage and encourage
a feeling of responsibility for it.
> Q>uTHE UNESCO lOURIER SEITEMBER I 997 33
