omen in the front line BY DEBARATI GUHA-SAPIR
Women in developing countries should be key players
in disasterpreparedness and relief
"Women in traditional rural
societies feel reluctance to
consult male doctors. The use
of women health workers and
nurses would be a step in the
right direction." Above, a
community health worker (at
right) informs Bangladesh
village women about medical
treatment for children.
/t too often goes unreported that women
and children usually suffer more than men
in natural disasters, especially in the coun¬
tries of the South.
Preparedness and prevention programmes
mostly ignore their vulnerability and few relief
programmes are designed with them in mind.
Since they play only a marginal role in com
munity decision-making, they can rarely com¬
mandeer relief supplies or have a say in post-
disaster rehabilitation.
Most of the 100,000 people who died in the
1991 Bangladesh cyclone, for example, were
women. Many died trying to protect their chil¬
dren and some because they stayed in their
homes and kept away from the cyclone shelters

because they felt obliged to safeguard their
property. Although the cyclone warning system
was in place, it was only partly effective because
gender was ignored. Furthermore, the absence
of women doctors meant that many women
and girls needing care did not venture to emer¬
gency clinics for treatment.
In severe droughts, women face a sharply
increased workload because men often migrate
in search of work. Their health suffers, and as
water tables get lower and lower they have to
fetch water from further and further away.
Hygiene deteriorates as the physical strain
takes a toll on their already malnourished bod¬
ies. High mortality of cattle means less milk
and meat to go round.
And yet women in traditional communities
can play a key role in disaster preparedness and
relief in areas they are used to handling such as
distribution of food, water, blankets and jer-
rycans and the siting of lavatories. They take
decisions about the welfare of children, includ¬
ing their evacuation, feeding and safe keeping in
chaotic times. Education and public informa¬
tion campaigns should take account of these
social and cultural responsibilities. Informa¬
tion on where food or other supplies can be
obtained and the claims to such relief should be
spelled out for the general public but should
keep women very much in mind. Illiteracy and
other factors may limit a woman's access to
such information.
Drought preparedness programmes should
strengthen women as farmers in their own
right and ensure that water distribution plans
recognize that they are usually responsible for
this task.
Cultural and social constraints also aggra¬
vate the problems displaced women face in
using health and sanitary services. Although it
is widely known that women in traditional
rural societies feel reluctance (in some cases
reinforced by taboos) to consult or be treated
by male doctors, standard relief response does
not seem to take this into account. The use
of women health workers and nurses, rather
Above and above right, victims
of the cyclone that hit
Bangladesh in May 1991.

than male doctors, would be a step in the right
direction.
Risk mapping in disaster-prone areas
should identify the vulnerable population by
sex and identify ways in which women are
particularly at risk. The development of
women's networks and community groups
to discuss disaster preparedness, examine past
experiences and decide on solutions should
also be encouraged.
Reporting of sex-differentiated mortality
and morbidity data would improve field inter¬
ventions. In camps for persons displaced by
natural disasters registration for services such
as food or health care should also be done by
sex of recipient. Knowledge of the different
ways in which men and women use services is
critical in planning and targeting unreached
population groups.
There has been a spectacular rise in relief
funding in the last few years, and donors under
pressure from relief and development agencies
clamouring for increasing resources are raising
"Since women play only a
marginal role in community
decision-making, they rarely
have a say in post-disaster
rehabilitation." Below, a scene
of devastation in Bangladesh
after the 6 May 1991 cyclone.
questions about traditional approaches. Relief
operations are coming under greater pressure
to provide better quality of service and higher
levels of cost-efficiency. A first step towards
reducing the vulnerability and number of dis¬
aster victims would be to integrate women
more fully into the planning and execution of
disaster preparedness and relief schemes.
LV f*"f&
