Is there more
to the human
face than meets
the eye?
ace values
BY DAVID LE BRETON
The American artist George Catlin
was once painting the portrait of a
Sioux chieftain, Little Bear, and as
the portrait was in semi-profile,
part of the sitter's face was obscured. There
was consternation when one of the
bystanders called out roughly: "Little Bear
is only half a man". Little Bear asked who
it was that had spoken and the man gave his
name, adding: "Ask the painter, he knows
you are only half a man. He has painted
only half your face. He knows the other
half is no good."
A conflict that had been simmering
beneath the surface of relations between
the two men had erupted into the open
over the interpretation, in moral terms, of
a portrait, a painting wherein the sitter's
worth is symbolically represented by the
face he or she presents to other people.
Shon-Ka, Little Bear's adversary, urged him
to make the painter show him "full face".
10
THE UNESCO lOURlERB APRIL 1997

I he face gives living,
mysterious expression to the
absolute nature of the
differences between
individuals."
Little Bear rejected the suggestion, but soon
the two men were again at loggerheads.
Shon-Ka challenged Little Bear, shouting:
"If he is a whole man, let him show it". To



save face in the eyes of the others, the two
men had to fight it out to the finish. Unfor¬
tunately, Little Bear's wife, knowing her
husband's short temper, had taken the pre¬
caution of unloading his rifle, so that when
the men fired at each other Shon-Ka was
unhurt but his shot hit Little Bear full in the
face, lacerating the "no good" part as if sym¬
bolically confirming Shon-Ka's accusations.
Shon-Ka did not benefit by his deed. He
hightailed it out into the prairie pursued by
his fellow-tribesmen, while Catlin hastily
packed up his belongings.
A mirror of individuality
Refusal to allow people the dignity of hav¬
ing a face of their own is a prime example
of how to deny their status as human
beings. There are a variety of metaphori¬
cal expressions losing face, putting a bold
face on things, being discountenanced, and
so forth that show how important the
face is to an individual's sense of identity
within the social context. Saving face and
being able to look others in the face are
considered serious issues in very many
societies. In the symbology of racism, the
suppression of all that is human in people
requires that the sign denoting their mem¬
bership of the human race be destroyed.
In racist taunts they are treated as animals
THE UNESCO ^JURIERB APRIL 1997

and degraded. To be stripped of their
human rank they have to be symbolically
deprived of their faces, the more easily to
be despised or destroyed.
In everyday life, it is by our faces that
we recognize one another. By going about
with our hands and faces uncovered we
are exposing those features by which we
may be immediately differentiated. While
the body forms the line of demarcation
between the self and the external world or



other people, it is in the face that the iden¬
tity which gives social and cultural mean¬
ing to the individual is displayed. It is the
" Physiognomy endeavours
to dispel the mystery of other
people, to reduce it to a few
simple features and a specific
character, which entails an
illusion of control that
becomes a fearsome
weapon in the hands of those
who practice it as if it were a
science."
face that gives living, mysterious expres¬
sion to the absolute nature of what are in
fact only minute differences between indi¬
viduals. Faces work an infinite range of
variations on the same simple theme, cre¬
ating billions of shapes and expressions
out of the most basic of symbols eyes,
nose, forehead, and so on. Facial features
and expressions relate individuals to the
community and at the same time allow
them full scope to assert their differences
and their uniqueness.
Of all parts of the body, it is in the face,
that the highest values are concentrated. It
is there that the sense of identity is mir¬
rored, there that attractiveness and all the
gradations of beauty and ugliness are
recorded. So high a value is placed on it
that any disfigurement becomes a trau¬
matic experience, almost resulting in a loss
of identity. The more importance a society
attaches to individuality, the greater is the
face's value. Portrait painting appeared in
Europe at the time of the Renaissance, that
is, at the same time as the individualism
which characterizes Western societies.
The Florentine painters of the quattro¬
cento, Masaccio, Paolo Uccello and Piero
della Francesca, were at pains to render
the facial features of their sitters with
meticulous accuracy, as were Flemish
painters, especially Van Eyck, in his Virgin
with Chancellor Rolin (1435), for example.
I First impressions
As there seems to be a disturbing corre¬
spondence between personality and facial
form, there was a strong temptation to
make the face a kind of stand-in for the
individual, the outward and visible sign of
the character within. In religious art, the
inexpressible and singular nature of the
face was already reflected in the idea of it
as the place wherein the soul chooses to

make its dwelling, where the spiritual takes
corporeal form.
The importance of the face to the sense
of identity is clear from the attention that
lovers pay to it in their relationships, a theme
plentifully illustrated in literature. "One of
the signs of love", says Anne Philippe, "is the
passion with which the lover looks at the
loved one's face; the initial emotion, instead
of dwindling, continues and swells, and the
look in their eyes becomes Ariadne's thread,
leading each to the other's heart."1 The
French novelist Michel Tournier sees the
face as the focus of desire: "There is one
sure way of knowing whether you love
somebody," he writes. "It is when their face
inspires more physical desire than any other
part of their body."2
The lover's gaze seems permanently
on the verge of experiencing some reve¬
lation and feeds upon that anticipation. The
face always seems to be the place where
the truth is at any moment about to be
unveiled. Inexhaustible in its store of new
or undiscovered meanings, it is like a ter¬
ritory waiting to be explored afresh every
day, and the end of a love-relationship no
doubt comes when the lovers find each
other's faces ordinary and no longer seek
out the mystery in them.
It is only a step from perceiving, as peo¬
ple often do, a close correspondence
between the "soul" and the face, and
believing that a thorough acquaintance
with other people's minds can be obtained
from studying their features. Although,
as Montaigne says, "The face is a feeble
surety", faces nevertheless exert a very
strong influence when people meet.
Other people's faces create a "first impres¬
sion" of liking or mistrust, curiosity or
fear that is not always easily dispelled.
This emotional reaction, which is felt at
first glance and in which imagination plays
a very large part, to some extent directs
"In love the face always seems
to be the place where the truth
is at any moment about to be
unveiled."
the course of future encounters. What the
Swiss writer Johann Kaspar Lavater (1741-
1801), the founder of physiognomies,
called this "physiognomical feeling",
though lacking in discernment, is one of
the things that facilitate or hamper contact
with others.
The fallacy ofphysiognomy
Physiognomy therefore set itself the task
of obliging faces to yield up their secrets.
It claimed that individuals' external features
faithfully reflect their inner characters and
that their moral qualities can be immedi¬
ately ascertained from the study of those
> CpuiTHE UNESCO IOURIERB APRIL 1097
10

features. Those who can read the signs of
the inter-relationship between soul and
body, whereby the face becomes as it were
the individual's moral signature, hold mas¬
tery of their relations with other people.
Physiognomy endeavours to dispel the
mystery of other people, to reduce it to a
few simple features and a specific character,
and also to reveal, to expose the soul behind
the body's disguise a dubious enterprise
entailing an illusion of control that becomes
a fearsome weapon in the hands of those
who practice it as if it were a science.
The vocabulary of physiognomy
changes from place to place and period to
period but the illusion of total control over
others remains constant. It was in the nine¬
teenth century that this pseudo-science
" I he Florentine painters of
the quattrocento were at pains
to render the facial features of
their sitters with meticulous
accuracy." Below, a portrait of
Battista Sforza by the Tuscan
painter Piero della Francesca
(1416-1492).
flourished in Europe. Lavater and to an
even greater extent his followers reduced
human individuality to a small number of
visual clues tied in with a typology of per¬
sonality that psychology has since dis¬
carded. They were in fact interested not in
the face as a whole but in sets of facial fea¬
tures: merely from the shape of a forehead,
the curl of a lip, the set of a nose or the look
in the subjects' eyes, assumptions could be
made about their psychological make-up;
and their moral essence, their tempera¬
ments, hidden vices, qualities or faults and,
their as yet uncommitted acts of faithless¬
ness could be unambiguously brought to
light. For the physiognomists, the arrange¬
ment of the features unlocked the secret
of the individual's identity.
The ambivalence and the element of sur¬
prise present in human beings' relationship
with their own faces should in fact be
enough to discourage anyone from trying to
map out the personality on the basis of facial
characteristics. The great painters of self-
portraits such as Rembrandt painted them¬
selves over and over again with different
faces. "The physiognomy," wrote the sev¬
enteenth-century French moralist Jean de
La Bruyère, "though it may serve for the
purpose of conjecture, is not a measure
whereby we may judge men."3 Faces give
only indications of other people's person¬
alities, not full descriptions. It is only possi¬
ble to get to know others by meeting them,
speaking to them and seeing them in action.
Faces are not pretty geometrical figures or
sets of tell-tale features. Only when
approached delicately, with a special kind
of gentleness, does a face reveal its innu¬
merable facets.
l. Miroirs; autoportraits, an anthology edited by Michel
Tournier. Denoel, Paris, 1973.
2. Michel Tournier, La goutted'or, Gallimard, Paris, 1986.
3. Jean de La Bruyère, Les caractères ou lesmde ce
siècle, 1688 (first edition).
!* THE UNESCO COURIER« APRIL 1997
