Iceland's hidden fire
BYTHORVILHJÁLMSSON
*%* _ ,*%
© Ragnar Axelsson/Liaison Inl/Hoa Qui, Pans
The modern-
minded
traditionalists
and hard-headed
dreamers who
live on an island
of extremes
Iceland, an island in the North
Atlantic ocean, is a land of
glaciers, volcanoes and
geysers. The capital, Reykjavik,
top, is located on Faxa Bay In
the southwest of the island.
Iceland. Not a very inviting name for the
prospective tourist turning the atlas
round with an indolent finger while looking for
somewhere to relax. What can people make of
it, especially since another country that reaches
all the way to the North Pole and is little more
than snow and ice is called Greenland?
But unalluring though its name may
sound, Iceland is a country that invites and
welcomes people who possess the gift of
curiosity, are ready to use their eyes and ears,
and let their sense of fantasy revel in the unique
scenery that awaits them. People of the kind
described in the Bible as "seeing they do not
see and hearing they do not hear" would be
well advised to go elsewhere
People who live surrounded by sea have a
particular way of perceiving themselves and the
world. For Icelanders, the ocean has always been
both an invitation and a deterrent and in spite
of modern technology it still is. Through the
centuries young seafarers who braved its perils
to reach other countries and other people passed
a rite of initiation into adulthood. They
returned matured by their experience, accepted
as people worth listening to, people with a tale
to tell. Homecomers were ready to feel and
understand more profoundly their own
scenery, the magic of their own island.
For centuries the people of Iceland looked
out at the sea and the sky from shore, cliff or
mountain, their backs itching where wings
tried to sprout. In the blue opening of the
clouds on a overcast day they saw golden tow¬
ers beaming at them, princesses winking fro m
balconies, and crowd-packed streets. All the
wonders of diversity lay before them. The
courts of kings waited to be immortalized by
the gift of poetry that ripens in solitude and
grows in silence.
Loneliness and silence
Behind them lay a vast country whose land¬
scapes by turns wild and protective, mild and
fierce, hostile and gentle are constantly being
shaped by warring extremes. Fire lurks beneath
the glacier's shining white shield where it meets
the cloudless sky. You feel that nothing is

remote and that you can see all the way to the
end of the world. You see the lava-fields ruffled
into contorted figures imprisoning eerie beings,
monsters sacralized in stone, anguished souls
waiting to be released from the purifying tor¬
tures of Purgatory. For centuries they have
moaned in the wind as they watched the soli¬
tary traveller go about his business.
These travellers were richly endowed by
the storytelling of their people of their
grandmothers, of the taciturn, reluctantly elo¬
quent farmer-fishermen who were their fathers
and grandfathers. They grew up in a demand¬
ing land which offered the senses food for
observation and thought. They benefited from
having to learn very early how to survive the
sudden whims of unpredictable nature, and
bear the burden of loneliness and silence
amidst the wind's roar. The distance between
one farm and the next may be so great that
you have time, while crossing a mountain or
finding your way through a blizzard, to com¬
pose in your mind a yarn to tell the people on
the farm you are making for and satisfy their
hunger for news, for words, for sagas.
Telling stories has carried the Icelanders
through the centuries, through good times and
bad. It was in Iceland that the Sagas, that body
of universal literature, were written in the thir¬
teenth and fourteenth centuries, mainly in a
language that could be easily understood in all
THE UNESCO ^>URIER DECEMBER 1997
Svartsengl geothermal
plant, above, provides
Reykjavik with hot water. The
diversion of its surplus
production into a lava field
has given rise to the Blue
Lagoon (foreground), whose
mineral-rich waters have a
temperature varying from
25to35°C.
the countries of the north, as well as in Viking
settlements in Ireland, Yorkshire and other
parts of the British Isles, and in Normandy.
It has actually been said that Icelanders do not
take any fact entirely seriously unless it can be
used in a story or a poem. On a superficial
acquaintance, this may not seem true of modern
Icelanders who seem to be absorbed in the super¬
fluities of fashion, technological gadgetry and
other wonders of modernity. But it is part of
our nature, a result of the fact that we lead dou¬
ble lives, being at the same time ultra-modern
and ancient, natural and supernatural, surrealis¬
tic dreamers and super-realistic technicians.
The Viking spirit
It is often said that Icelanders can trace their
ancestry back to the Viking seafarers who came
from rocky northern countries and learned
how to build boats that elegantly resisted the
fury of the raging Atlantic. The Vikings had
already sailed southwards and eastwards before
settling in Iceland. They had penetrated into
the vastness of Russia, voyaged up the Seine to
Paris, and journeyed to Sicily and Rome. Then,
with only the stars to guide them, they found
this strange island and settled there. Before that
they had made landfall in Ireland and took
slaves from this civilized nation with a rich lit¬
erary tradition.

Rugged moorland
landscape of Manalaugard in
the south of Iceland.
In 930 the settlers in Iceland established
the Althing, today the world's oldest parlia¬
ment. In the year 1000 paganism was officially
renounced and Christianity was accepted. The
slaves brought from Ireland merged with the
Viking people, losing their language but fer¬
tilizing their masters' creativity. Civilization
develops as the vanquished enrich their rulers'
souls and become the ultimate victors.
In 1262 we lost our independence to the
Norwegian king and later to the Danish king¬
dom, under which we remained as a kind of
colony. Our situation gradually deteriorated
and a chapter in our history ended in 1550
with the downfall of the Catholic church,
which had been the only effective bulwark
against foreign royal power and colonization.
With Protestantism we moved into the dark
ages of our existence. "Everyone died who
could", says a character in a book by our
Nobel prize-winning writer Halldôr Laxness.
Our risorgimento was partly due to an explo¬
sion of poetry and romanticism in the last
century led by realistic leaders who gained first
autonomy in internal affairs, then home rule
at the turn of the century, virtual indepen¬
dence by the end of the First World War, and
finally the re-establishment of a completely
independent republic in 1944.
After independence Icelandic society was
jerked out of its medieval pattern of life and
work. Until then life had been limited to herd¬
ing and cultivating barely fertile ground,
rounding up sheep in autumn and bringing
them home from their summer mountain pas¬
tures. As the men of the farm cut the grass,
they would recite epic poems whose words
were carried away by the wind. Serious con¬
versation was rare with anyone except your
dog and, on Sundays, your horse. On the rare
occasions when a foreigner appeared in your
farmstead he was led into your lowly grass-
thatched abode and then you sent for the cler¬
gyman to converse with him in Latin. For
centuries, fishing was done by small crews in
rowing boats.
This may be all behind us, but it is still
within us. Our isolation has been definitely
broken. Now we go up into the mountains to
seek anew its ancient privileges, and recharge
our spirit in the wilderness beside a rushing
brook while torrents roar in canyons in the
background and the colours explode into our
eyes.
