REFLECTIONS



THE WORLD IS A SANCTUARY
BY HENRYK SKOLIMOWSKI
The time has come to abandon the metaphor which
has for so long dominated our perception of the
world and to reject the damaging assumption that
the world is a clock-like mechanism within which we
are little cogs and wheels. It has led us to reduce
everything, including human life, to the status of
components of this great machine. The consequences
have been disastrous. Only when we find a new
metaphor and invent a new conception of the world
shall we be able to stand up to the senseless, destruc¬
tive forces that have swept over our lives.
According to one tenet of ecological thought
the world is a sanctuary and we should treat it as
such. This assumption is the basis of a completely
different outlook on the universe and our place
within it. If we live in a sanctuary, then we must
treat it with reverence and care. We must be the
earth's custodians and shepherds. The idea of stew¬
ardship naturally follows from the assumption that
the world is a sanctuary.
These are the basic components of what I call
the ecological metanoia: simultaneously changing
our metaphor of the world, our attitude to it, and
our thinking about it. This can and is being done.
Of course it is a large and difficult project, and
this is why it is progressing slowly, haltingly, some¬
times grudgingly. For psychological and historical
reasons, we are reluctant to change, but deep down,
we know that we must do so. This is not the end of
the story, however. Other important changes must
occur before we arrive at a sane, sustainable and ful¬
filling world.
This quest for meaning leads us on to the ques¬
tion of the purpose of human life and to those ulti¬
mate concerns upon which our humanity is based.
One characteristic of our times is the atrophy of
meaning. Both religious people and secularists are
aware that there is a desperate search for meaning
in modern society. We do not find a meaning in con¬
sumption, entertainment and ordinary jobs. We
look for a larger purpose and we do not find it. For
this larger purpose requires a transcendent dimen¬
sion to our life.
This is where eschatology comes in. Eschatology
is the sphere of human thinking which is concerned
with the ultimate ends of human life and thus with
the meaning of human life, and with the question
of what gives meaning to meaning. Eschatology has
traditionally been the discipline which envisages
transcendent goals as the purpose of our life. These
goals are often, hut not always, religious. Tran¬
scendent goals and purposes must not be mistaken
for a religious agenda or religious beliefs.
Why do we need a new eschatology? Why do
we need a new transcendent purpose to give mean¬
ing to human life? The answer is that secular escha
tology, promising fulfilment here on earth in mate¬
rialist and secular terms alone has failed dismally.
Instead of bringing happiness and fulfilment, it has
robbed us of the deeper dimensions of human life.
Some secular humanists are aware of this and have
attempted to devise a new scheme, whereby a new
transcendent purpose is grafted on to secularism.
They postulate a task of continual self-improve¬
ment in the pursuit of perfectibility and freedom.
But these are only words. If perfectibility and self-
improvement are to mean anything, they must be
rooted in a deeper sense of transcendence which
goes beyond secularism.
It is thus time to abandon our linear modes of
thinking and an exploitative attitude toward nature
in favour of an ecological perspective and a new
form of spirituality.
Let us very briefly state some of the main con¬
tentions of the new ecological world-view, which
are also components of the new eschatology. The
universe is on a meaningful journey of self-realiza¬
tion. We are a part of this journey. The universe is
not a haphazard heap of matter and we meaning-
lessly drifting particles in it. The new Astrophysics,
the New Physics and the Anthropic Principle all
converge to inform us that we live in an intelligent
universe, self-actualizing itself. There is a won¬
derful coherence in this process of continuous self-
transcendence. Nowadays this is well supported
by science. I am not saying it is "proved" by sci¬
ence, for science cannot prove such things. A lead¬
ing contemporary physicist, Freeman Dyson, has
said: "Looking at all the 'coincidences' which have
occurred in the evolution of the cosmos, we cannot
escape the conclusion that the cosmos behaves as
if it had known that we were coming". A leading
American physicist, John Archibald Wheeler, main¬
tains that when we look at the universe, it is the uni¬
verse itself which is looking at itself, through our
eyes and minds. For we live in a curiously partici¬
patory universe, and we are profoundly woven in
this stupendous participatory process.
We are the eyes through which the universe
looks at itself. We are the minds through which
the universe contemplates itself. We have an incur¬
able urge to transcend because the will of the uni¬
verse to continually self-transcend itself is built
into us. We are cosmic, beings. We share with the
entire universe the dimension of transcendence and
the urge to self-realization. This has been the basis
of all enduring forms of spirituality.
A wonderful journey lies ahead of us as we seek
to actualize the cosmic meaning which resides in us,
to help the universe and all its creatures in the
journey of self-actualization and in the process of
healing the earth and making it blossom again. I
48 THE UNESCO COURIER« MARCH 1997
