COMMENTARY ederico Mayor
UNESCO AT WORK:
peace, development
and democracy
Through its work in education, science, culture and
communication, UNESCO seeks to free the individual. It
combats poverty, exclusion and violence, promotes
tolerance and multicultural dialogue and helps to pro¬
tect human diversity.
Convinced that it is only through freeing the indi¬
vidual that the political participation essential for
democratic coexistence can develop, UNESCO defends
human rights and the "personal sovereignty" of each
and every one. Democratic values give strength and
cohesion to the unlimited diversity of the human species
and promote its unity. UNESCO does not represent a
particular civilization but all countries without excep¬
tion: it represents humanity as a whole.
Its mission is to build peace in people's minds by con¬
tributing to human development within a framework of
justice and freedom, for the right to peace is a premise
on which all other human rights are based. With this
in mind, UNESCO encourages all citizens to learn about
and respect the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. These rights are neither given nor received;
they are put into practice on a day-to-day basis. They
are indivisible. Exercise of and respect for human
rights underpin the three great principles that inspired
the founders of the United Nations system: peace, jus¬
tice and freedom. While states and other entities or
institutions cannot grant these rights they must ensure
that they are respected.
UNESCO maintains contact with all peoples and all
sections of society in order to encourage the general
mobilization that is needed to bring about the transition
from the law of the strong to the law of reason, from a
culture of war based on coercion and power to a cul¬
ture of peace based on dialogue and persuasion.

Discouraging war and strengthening peace are two
sides of the same coin. Democracies do not have to be vul­
nerable. Citizens must feel that they are protected by the
rule oflaw and take pride in its enforcemeut. For these
reasons we need a new concept of security and of the role
of the armed forces. Astronomical sums are today ear­
marked by states to protect their territory from potential
international enemies. Civil society is left completely
exposed, and watches with dismay the establishment of
regimes which fill daily life with terror and suffering,
while intensive and profitable trading in weapons of
mass destruction continues all over the world.
Ashared reponsibility
The seeds of non-violence, tolerance and solidarity must
be sown very early. This is the only way in which peace
can become cultural, i.e. inherent in the organization of
life in society. We must plant the seeds today if they are
to bear fruit tomorrow. This germination will take place
in the schools. This is why education is the key to the dif­
ferent future that we desire for our children.
Education frees individuals and empowers them to
shape their future, to accept or reject according to
their own judgement, to act always "by their own
lights". The prime beneficiaries of this education are,
of course, the excluded, but lifelong education is of
concern to all, rich and poor, scholars and the wider
public, heads of government and ordinary citizens.
For living together in a spirit of good understanding is
a collective and shared responsibility.
This is UNESCO's field of action. It promotes the
transfer of knowledge and the access of all to the com­
munications media, without which reforming ideas do
not circulate. Freedom of expression is a prerequisite
of justice. And laws are only just if all citizens have the
right to express their views.
This is why UNESCO is constantly reminding gov­
ernments that education is a fundamental right for all
and as such must be accorded political and budgetary
priority by states. A country's development depends on
improving the level of education of its people. There
is a direct link between reorganizing budgetary prior-
ities in this way and the achievement of sustainable
socio-economic development. Subsidies and loans from
outside sources can make a valuable contribution for
a time, but external aid can never replace a nation's
political commitment to the education of all its citizens
as a matter of top priority.
The conscience of humanity
Education is a priority mission for UNESCO, but not its
only task. These tasks are many, and all are linked to
the promotion of the ideal of peace set forth in the Pre­
amble to its Constitution.
UNESCO works to safeguard the heritage-natural,
cultural (tangible and intangible), genetic and ethi­
cal-and fosters creativity in an endeavour to build the
cultural hcritage of the future. Through far-reaching
programmes on the environment (Man and the Bios­
phere, oceanography, hydrology and geology) and in
the social sciences (MOST), UNESCO encourages sci­
entific rigour in research and fosters the establishment
of exchange networks for reflection and training capa­
ble of providing rapid and sound solutions to many of
the questions facing humanity. The World Science
Conference to be held in 1999 will present a retro­
spective of the major scientific achievements of the
century.
The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome,
based on the excellent work carried out over the past
five years hy the International Bioethics Committee, is
the first ethical and legal framework of worldwide
scope on a subject that is profoundly scientific and
human, as well as being a major standard-setting con­
tribution made to humanity by UNESCO.
It must never be forgotten, however, that at the end
of the day it is up to nations to put all these ideals into
practice by ineorporating guidelines into their laws and
striving to reach the goals that they, with others, have
set at international conferences. In accordance with its
mandate UNESCO is required to denounce any situations
or actions that are contrary to the standards and ethical
values so clearly laid down in its Constitution. For
UNESCO is also a conscience of humanity. •
