The triáis of Ulysses
BY JACQUES LACARRIERE
There are more than 1,360 Greek islands.
Many are just bare rocks, home to a few
seagulls. Others are a little bigger but have no
water or other resources. They too are unin¬
habited, except by wild goats and seals. I've
been to many of these small islands and always
come away with the same feeling of having
lived for a few hours like one of my great
childhood heroes, Robinson Crusoe. I feel
like that even if I know lots of other people
have been there before me.
I would sit on an outcrop a few metres
above the sea, amid bushes of thyme and
orégano buzzing with bees, and watch fish¬
ing boats and yachts pass in the distance. They
couldn't see me. Mocking, crabby-sounding
gulls wheeled above me, staring and shrieking
at me, even louder when I went near their nests.
Their agonized cries always sound like the
laments and entreaties of desperate people,
which explains the old Greek belief that these
creatures were actually people changed into
gulls as a result of a curse.
There is nothing imaginary about these lit¬
tle islands, but their unusual, unexpected or
odd appearance and the danger they represent
for sailors must have won them an aura of
uncertainty and mystery from the earliest
times. People also wonder why some more
than others among the hundreds of islands
in the Aegean Sea have given rise to enduring
legends of Greek folklore.
Take Anaphi, a small volcanic islet between
Crete and Santorini whose name, already
known in ancient times, means "island of rev¬
elation". It has practically no vegetation and
just a port and a village and a single spring.
The island reputedly rose up out of the sea
on the orders of Apollo to give refuge to the
Argonauts caught in a night-time tempest.
Legend says the Argonauts saw the island
when a huge flash suddenly lit up the whole

sky and revealed it to them. The same kind of
thing is said about many islands in the
Mediterranean and in all seas in volcanic areas
of the world-islands that suddenly rise up
and then disappear as quickly as they came,
but are never forgotten.
To the ancient Greeks, islands were not the
product of natural phenomena but were usu­
ally the result of a god's wish. Hence the idea
of their uncertain destiny, that even the biggest
and apparently most solid of them could sud­
denly slip beneath the waves like Atlantis.
They are shifting universes, unstable and
threatened, at the mercy of the elements and
the whims of the gods. Zeus himself couldn't
make a whole continent disappear at once, but
an island he could.
And so the Greeks' dream island is also a
utopia from which danger and uncertainty have
been banished, islands of tranquillity in a
chaotic world, isolated but also protected, places
where you can live off your own resources. In
short, a paradise where nothing is forbidden,
where there is no serpent and above all no sur­
veillance or interference by the gods.
World history is full of imaginary islands.
They include Alcina (in Ariosto's Orlando
Furioso), Altruria (in William Dean Howells'
novel A Traveller from Altruria), Antangil



Amodern
poet's fresh
interpretation of
the meaning of
the Homeric
hero's epic voyage
"Ulysses and His Companions
Embarking after the Trojan
War", a 14th-century Italian
miniature.
Polyphemus the Cyclops
has his eye put out by
his prisoner, Ulysses.
Detail from a 7th·century·B.C.
Greek amphora.
(inJoachim du Moulin's History ofthe Great
and Admirable Kingdom of Antangil),
Atlantis (described by Plato in the Critias),
Balnibarbi, Laputa and Glubdubdrib (in
Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels), Barataria
(dreamed up by Cervantes), Bensalem (in
Francis Bacon's Nova Atlantis), the Island of
the Blest (described by Lucian of Samosata in
his True History), the Island at the End of the
Earth (Edgar Allan Poe), Edgar Rice Bur­
roughs' Caspak, Circe's island and Calypso's
island in the Odyssey, lkaria (in Etienne
Cabct's Icarie) and the island of the Immor­
tals Qorge Luis Borges).
I will stop the list here, at the letter I,
because it will take too long to get to U and
the distant lands of Utopia and anyway the
letter I is especially interesting when talking
about Greek islands.
An epic homeward journey
Only three of them start with I-los, the sup­
posed birthplace of Homer, Ikaria, where
Icarus is said to have falien to earth on his
flight from Crete, and Ithaka, the birthplace of
Ulysses. Of the three, Ithaka has played a key
part in Greek dreams about their islands.
Ulysses' wife Penelope was also from there, as
was his son Tclemachus. It was where the voy­
age to Tray began and where it ended. In
Homer's epic, it was the ideal island-a place to
settle, but also a place you left and returned to,
a place apart from the world but living from
its links with it.
Ulysses is an excellent example of an inhab­
itant of such a place-someone often away fro m
the island, sometimes exiled, someone who felt
intensely homesick. This was even the first ~

meaning of nostalgia, a Greek word which
means pain or longing (algos) to return home
(nostos), To be or feel nostalgic is to want to
return to your native land, which time or dis¬
tance separate you from and which becomes, in
the hearts and dreams of faraway sailors, what
was later, in the songs of the troubadours, the
dream and the desire for the distant princess.
So what about Ulysses the nostalgic? At
the end of the Trojan War, after ten years away,
Ulysses wanted only one thing to return to
Ithaka, his island, and get back his throne and
his Penelope. But the pride, the touchiness,
even hatred of the gods got in the way. Posei¬
don, god of the oceans, did not forgive
Ulysses for causing the defeat of the Trojans
through his invention and use of the Trojan
Horse, and did all he could to stop him
returning to Ithaka.
With a fair wind and fine weather, a good
boat would take a month and a half to get
from Troy to Ithaka. It took Ulysses ten years,
during which he lost all his companions one
after another and endured a whole string of
mishaps which are still an epic catalogue of
the monsters and marvels of the sea.
But the point about this eventful home¬
ward voyage is that it was precisely when he
reached Greek waters, where everything should
have been perfectly familiar to him, that he
encountered all the monsters and marvels in an
entirely imaginary context.
Don't look for the Laistrygonian islands,
the land of the Cyclopes, the rocks of the
Sirens, the palace of Circe or Calypso's cave.
They're everywhere and nowhere. Each rock,
creek, gully, cove, gulf or bay, every mountain,
cave, ravine or gorge can conjure them up. Even
the land of the dead where Ulysses ventured
after visiting the palace of Circe can be identi¬
fied as several places in Greece and Italy.
A voyage ofself-revelation
But the striking misfortunes which befell
Ulysses turned what was to have been, or
should have been a routine j ourney into a voy¬
age of personal initiation and self-revelation.
He did not, like other sailors, just have to face
the sea, the wind, the waves and the tempests,
or just human or natural enemies. He came face
to face with the inhuman, the horrific, even the
hellish.
Navigation has never involved such chal¬
lenges and excesses and only Ulysses and his
mythical cousin Jason had to confront these
extraordinary things, running into and grap¬



pling with the creatures of imaginary worlds.
At some points in the Odyssey, you get the
feeling that Ulysses, like Lewis Carroll's Alice
in Wonderland, is passing through the look¬
ing-glass of reality to find himself on the other
side of time and space.
20
Every journey should have a purpose and
every dream a goal. For a long time, perhaps
since the beginning, the trials of Ulysses
whether instigated by Poseidon or due to the
negligence or foolhardiness of Ulysses' com¬
panions have been regarded as obstacles,
delays and arduous detours on his return jour¬
ney. As time wasted fighting monsters, avoid¬
ing the Sirens, consulting the dead and even
falling into the lily-white arms of Calypso.
Everything in fact weather, companions,
monsters and gods seemingly conspired to
stop the islander from returning to his island.
Ulysses' hopes and strength were worn down
by these struggles. After so many years, what
is the value of a king without subjects, a hus¬
band without a wife, an islander without an
island? Without Ithaka, Ulysses was like
someone with a vital organ missing. He lacked
all that he needed homeland, subjects, wife
and palace in order to become again what he
had always been: a ruler.
But heaven and earth conspired against him
and a relentless god brought storms. All the
challenges posed to Ulysses by monsters and
phantoms, the illusions and the shadows that
he had either to outwit or fight head on and
that are seen as so many perhaps inevitable
delays on his journey home were also, when
the story of the voyage was told, so many
songs, expectations and hopes in the hearts of
listeners and later, of readers.
An innerjourney
There is another possible interpretation a
stronger and more solid one, I think of these
tragic and turbulent travels, with the con¬
stantly-delayed return and the endless ordeals.
It was made at the beginning of this century
by a Greek Alexandrian poet, Constantine
Cavafy, in a poem called Ithaka, which lays
bare the hidden meaning of the myth by shin¬
ing an unexpected new light on the trials of

Ulysses the islander. Cavafy said the real mean¬



ing of the Odyssey was that the things sent
to try Ulysses were not obstacles to his home¬
coming but vitally enriching detours so that
he would return to Ithaka matured by his vic¬
tories and the things he had learned.
Ulysses left Troy as a soldier, a sailor and a
war hero and finally reached Ithaka after learn¬
ing the secrets of life, death, strength and wis¬
dom. He left as a man and returned as Man. The
trials not only hardened him but changed his
spirit. He triumphed over brute force (the
Laistrygonians), over monsters (the Cyclopes),
over magic spells and having his men turned
into animals (Circe), over feigned seduction
(the Sirens) and even the irresistible charms
of love with the nymph Calypso. So to his
warrior feats at the gates of Troy, he added
the triple crown of wisdom, truth and love.
Through his trials, he had a complete experi¬
ence of body, heart and mind.
Cavafy said the real purpose of the voyage
was not to arrive but simply for it to take
place. For Ulysses, it was as much a return to
Ithaka as a long, vast and fertile return to him¬
self. Cavafy obliges us to re-read the Odyssey,
the greatest poem of discovery to be written
about the sea, in this completely different
light. Ithaka is the opposite of a promised
land. It is a conquered land, conquered from
the elements and from worldly illusions. A
land conquered through the slow, difficult
but inspiring lessons learned from encoun¬
ters with monsters, women and islands.
You who dream of being Ulysses, remem¬
ber that if you meet a Circe, a Calypso or a
Nausicaa, you will one day have to leave them
if you want to find your Penelope again. And
when the trials are over, the sea will murmur to
the Islander on the shores of the rediscovered
Ithaka the names of those he had to vanquish
or love before he could become a man. Like the
Nereids of the foaming sea and memory, like
the spray of the waves, healers at last.
"The Return of Ulysses", a
15th-century painting (Sienese
school) on a large Italian
wooden coffer or cassóne.
Here is this magic poem:
When you set outfor Ithaka
ask that your way be long,
full ofadventure, full of instruction.
The Laistrygonians and the Cyclops,
angry Poseidon do not fear them:
such as these you will neverfind
as long as your thought is lofty, as long as a rare
emotion touch your spirit and your body.
The Laistrygonians and the Cyclops,
angry Poseidon you will not meet them
unless you carry them in your soul,
unless your soul raise them up before you.
Ask that your way be long.
At many a summer dawn to enter
with what gratitude, what joy
ports seen for the first time;
to stop at Phoenician trading centres,
and to buy good merchandise,
mother ofpearl and coral, amber and ebony,
and sensuous perfumes ofevery kind,
sensuous perfumes as lavishly as you can;
to visit many Egyptian cities,
to gather stores ofknowledge from the learned.
Have Ithaka always in your mind.
Your arrival there is what you are destinedfor.
But do not in the least hurry the journey.
Better that it last for years,
so that when you reach the island you are old,
rich with allyou have gained on the way,
not expecting Ithaka to give you wealth.
Ithaka gave you the splendid journey.
Without her you would not have set out.
She hasn 't anything else to give you.
And ifyou find herpoor, Ithaka has not
deceived you.
So wise have you become, ofsuch experience,
that already you will have understood what
these Ithakas mean.
(From Six Poets ofModern Greece. Chosen, translated
and introduced by Edmund Keelcy and Philip
Sherrard. Published by Thames and Hudson, London,
1960 © Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard 1960)
