
"... 'Beauty' has become one of our age's most potent mys¬
teries, the inexplicable quality which brings the Egyptian
masterpieces into communion with the statues of our own
cathedrals, or the Aztec temples, or the Indian or Chinese
grottoes; with the paintings of Cézanne and Van Gogh, with
the greatest dead and the greatest living artists; with, in short,
the whole treasury of the first world civilization.
"This is an immense regeneration, of which our own
Renaissance will soon seem a diffident prefiguring. For the first ,
time, men have discovered a universal language of art. We
feel its influence acutely, even if we only partly understand its
nature. This tremendous storehouse of art, of which we are
now becoming conscious, draws its force no doubt from its

being the most signal victory of human effort over death. To
the impregnable 'nevermo re' that governs the history of civ¬
ilizations, this art opposes its own mysterious grandeur.
"Of the force that brought Egypt into being out of pre¬
historic night, nothing now remains; but the impulse which
engendered these giants which are threatened today still
speaks to us as clearly as the genius of the master-craftsmen
of Chartres, or the genius of Rembrandt. The emotion we
share with the creators of these granite statues is not even one
of love, nor a common feeling for death nor even, per¬
haps, a similar way of looking at their work; yet before their
work, the accents of anonymous sculptors forgotten during
two thousand years seem to us as much untouched by the
succession of empires as the accents of mother love.
"This is what brings throngs of Europeans to exhibitions
of Mexican art; of Japanese to exhibitions of French art; and
millions of Americans to see Van Gogh. This is why the com¬
memorative ceremonies of Rembrandt's death were inau¬
gurated by the last kings of Europe, and the exhibition of our
The main temple of Abu Simbel,
one of the many Nubian
monuments rescued from the waters
of the Nile thanks to the
international campaign launched by
Unesco in 1960.
u r-
-
"' The Director-General
of Unesco at the time was
Mr. Vittorino Veronese. Editor
own stained glass by the brother of the last Asian emperor. This
is why, Mr. Director-General"", so many sovereign names are
associated with the appeal you are launching today.
"One could not too highly praise your having conceived
a plan so magnificent and so precise in its boldness one
might say, a kind of Tennessee Valley Authority of archae¬
ology. It is the antithesis of the kind of gigantic exhibitionism
by which great modern states try to outbid each other. Nor
should the well-defined object of your scheme conceal its
profound significance. If UNESCO is trying to rescue the
monuments of Nubia, it is because these are in imminent
danger; it goes without saying that it would try to save other
great ruins Angkor or Nara, for instance if they were
similarly threatened.
"On behalf of man's artistic heritage, you are appealing to
the world's conscience as others have been doing, this week,
for the victims of the Agadir earthquake. 'May we never
have to choose,' you said just now, 'between porphyry stat¬
ues and living men!' Yours is the first attempt to deploy, in
a rescue operation, on behalf of statues, the immense
resources usually harnessed for the service of men. And
this is perhaps because for us the survival of statues has
become an expression of life.
"At the moment when our civilization divines a mysteri¬
ous transcendence in art and one of the still obscure sources of
its unity, at the moment when we are bringing into a single,
family relationship the masterpieces of so many civilizations
which knew nothing of or even hated each other, you are
proposing an action which brings all men together to defy the
forces of dissolution. Your appeal is historic, not because it
proposes to save the temples of Nubia, but because through
it the first world civilization publicly proclaims the world's art
as its indivisible heritage. In days when the West believed its cul¬
tural heritage had its source in Athens, it could nonetheless
look on with equanimity while the Acropolis crumbled away.
"The slow flood of the Nile has reflected the melancholy
caravans of the Bible, the armies of Cambyses and Alexan¬
der, the knights of Byzantium and Islam, the soldiers of
Napoleon. No doubt when the sandstorm blows across it,
its ancient memory no longer distinguishes the brilliant notes
of Rameses' triumph from the pathetic dust that settles again
in the wake of defeated armies. And when the sand is scat¬
tered again, the Nile is once more alone with its sculpted
mountains, its colossal effigies whose motionless reflection
has for so long been part of its echo of eternity.
"But see, old river, whose floods allowed astrologers to
fix the most ancient date in history, men are coming now,
from all parts of the world, who will carry these giants far
away from your life-giving, destructive waters. Let the night
fall, and you will reflect again the stars under which Isis
accomplished her funeral rites, the star of Rameses. But the
humblest worker come to rescue the statues of Isis and
Rameses will tell you something you have always known
but never heard from men before: that there is only one
action over which indifferent stars and unchanging, mur¬
murous rivers have no sway: it is the action of a man who
snatches something from death."
