IN YOUTHFUL HANDS
by Ingunn Kvister0y
Are you good-natured, respectful and respected, humble, tolerant, courageous, unselfish, con¬
fident, educated, dynamic, reasonable, diplomatic, intelligent and young in mind and body?
If you are all of these things, then why not become a "Patrimonito"a young heritage
guardianand take part in Unesco's Young People's Participation in World Heritage Preser¬
vation and Promotion project?
Patrimonitothe name is the diminutive of the Spanish word for "heritage"is a smil¬
ing cartoon character designed on the basis of the World Heritage logo to symbolize young
people's involvement in heritage preservation. He was invented by Spanish-speaking par¬
ticipants in a media workshop organized during the first global World Heritage Youth Forum,
held in June 1995 in Bergen (Norway). And because Patrimonito is a catchy-sounding word,
itand hewas enthusiastically adopted by other language groups at the Forum. By the time
a regional World Heritage Youth Forum was held a year later at Victoria Falls (Zimbabwe),
Patrimonito had really caught on.
The idea behind his creation originated in 1994. After working closely with leading
architects, archaeologists, jurists and historians from many countries, Unesco felt that the
time had come to get young people involved in protecting the World Heritage. Twenty-five coun¬
tries worldwide were invited to take part. Unesco proposed a challenging task. The countries
were invited to run projects, teach history, geography, science, religion, language and lit¬
erature from a World Heritage point of view, organize visits to sites and museums and use
the students' creative potential in the arts.
After that first year teacher and student representatives of the twenty-five countries
were invited to attend the Bergen Youth Forum and swap their experiences.
Both students and teachers handed out plenty of advice to Unesco on the development
of its World Heritage Education (WHE) project, and Unesco adjusted its programme accord¬
ingly. In the next two years efforts were made to involve more countries in the scheme,
regional gatherings for participating students and teachers were held and produced regional
action plans, and WHE teaching materials were developed to cover such issues as identity,
peace, environmental questions and tourism.
In 1996 two regional forums were held, one in Dubrovnik (Croatia), the other at Victo¬
ria Falls (Zimbabwe). Encouraging students and teacher trainers to become involved, pro¬
viding WHE teaching materials, organizing youth forums and strengthening national capac¬
ities are part of an overall strategy that links Unesco's standard-setting and instrumental roles.
It is helping to provide young people with the knowledge, skills, attitudes and commitment
to preserve World Heritage for future generations.
