FROM PELFHOOD
TO P ALVATION
BY ROMAIN MAITRA In Hindu thought the body is a finely
tuned instrument always threatened with disharmony
Mn 18th-century Indian miniature from Rajasthan
showing the subtle body.
9JHI, ..¿tit* -,#...,*
Tun i^Mhi^wMmw diMí^ín,
r n the Indian tradition, the human body
is viewed as integrating a complex vari¬
ety of mental and physical processes.
L It is part of a body-mind continuum
that is regarded as the instrument of a Self
(Atman) or Soul that is essentially transcen¬
dent and free of its embodied condition.
The ancient Hindu scriptures, the Upan-
ishads, contain many passages on the body-
mind complex and its relation to the Atman.
The body-mind complex arises from the
ultimate Atman from which the universe
came into being: "from Him are born life,
mind, the sense organs and also ether, wind,
fire, water and earth." In the Upanishadis
the body is also described as "foul-smelling
and insubstantial", but another sacred
Hindu text, the Bhagavad Gita, describes
it as the chosen vehicle of "the perpetual,
imperishable and incomprehensible body-
dweller" in which the Atman breathes and
from which it radiates.
Later systems of Hindu philosophy
assign to each person two bodies an exte¬
rior or "gross body" and an interior or
"subtle body". Perhaps Indian philoso¬
phers conceived of the existence of a sub¬
tle body in order to make intelligible the
process of metempsychosis or transmi¬
gration of the soul after death. The Vedanta,
one of the main philosophical schools of
28 > GuTHE UNESCO lOURIERB APRIL 1997

In the Himalayas, a yogi and a
young Buddhist monk practise
concentration. Hinduism, regards this subtle body as
incorporating the senses of the body
both perceptive and active and of mind,
intellect and sensation.
In this Hindu conception, the subtle
body links together physiological and psy¬
chological processes. It is believed to be
made up of a web of numerous arteries
{nadis) through which the vital energy cir¬
culates, and of a few centres called wheels
{cakras), receptacles {adharas) and knots
{granthis), where the arteries converge
and meet the nerves of the gross body.
The three principal arteries ida,pingala
and susumna extend along the spinal col¬
umn between the spot next to the anus,
the muladhar cakra, and the spot on top of
the skull, the brahmarandhra, where a
thousand-petaled white lotus blossoms.
However, the cakra patterns between
these two spots vary according to differ¬
ent theological systems and usually cor¬
respond to psychosomatic sites experi¬
enced during yogic practices.
I A microcosm ofthe universe
A vital goal of Tantra, basically a Hindu
(also Buddhist) system of esoteric prac¬
tices for attaining spiritual experiences and
the fulfilment of worldly desires, is to spir¬
itualize the human body which is consid¬
ered to be a microcosm of the universe.
Tantric discipline enables us to discover a
mystical geography in the subtle body.
The spinal cord represents the fictitious
Mount Meru. The three principal arteries
running along the left, the right and the
middle of the spine represent the three
sacred rivers, Ganga, Yamuna and Saras-
vati. The breathing process represents the
span of time. By awakening the female
force Sakti, lying dormant like a coiled ser¬
pent in the muladhar, and making it move
upward along the spinal cord to be united
with the male force Siva at the brah¬
marandhra, the yogi realizes the supreme
non-duality of the Self.
r 29
THE UNESCO ^_OURIER APRIL 1997

In the theoretical construct of
Ayurveda "the science of long life"
life {ayus) arises due to association of body,
sensory capacities, mind and Self. The
gross, physical body is an arrangement of
the five elements which are present in
nature and are genetically transmitted
through the semen of the father and the
ovum and blood of the mother. They are
earth, water, fire, wind and space.
Wind {vayu), fire {tejas) and water {ap)
are fundamental to Ayurvedic biological
theory for they are considered as the prin¬
cipal components of life and movement.
Taken together, these elements generate a
nutrient fluid {rasa) that nourishes the
body as a whole.
Mn 18th-century Indian
miniature depicting kundallni
(from the Sanskrit kundala,
"coil" of rope), latent energy
colled like a serpent at the
base of the trunk in the subtle
body. The energy Is
"awakened" by certain yogic
disciplines.
i The three humours
Wind {vayu) is dry, light and soft, and indi¬
cates motion. It manifests itself as the
motor system of the organism which
includes respiration, swallowing, speak¬
ing, digestion, excretion, ejaculation, the
labour of childbirth and so on. Fire man¬
ifests itself as the energy system of the
organism, including bilious secretion
{pitta) of the liver and the "cooking"
process of the digestion, the colouring in
blood and complexion, and the energiz¬
ing of desire. Pitta is hot, bitter, oily fluid
of bluish colour. Water manifests itself as



the integrating system of the body, includ¬
ing phlegm {kaph), mucus, plasma and so
forth and holds together the limbs and tis¬
sues. Kaph is heavy, moist, unctuous and
white and is conveyed by air through the
vessels. According to the biological prin¬
ciple of Ayurveda, therefore, vayu, pitta
and kaph are the overall respiratory, diges¬
tive and integrative components of the
gross body, its three essential humours.
When these components are in balance
and harmony, they contribute to the health
of the organism, and when they are not,
they cause illnesses. Thus, the human
body exists in a state of precarious and
constantly threatened equilibrium, and
the task of the physician is to diagnose the
imbalances that occur in the person and
restore balance through treatment.
Ayurveda defines a healthy person as one
in whom there is equilibrium of the
humours and where the body substances
perform normal digestive and excretory
functions as well as gratifying the senses,
mind and soul as a result of living a pure life.
Impurity and bodily pollution are not
only the ultimate cause of much organic
illness, but also expose people to diabolic
affliction and cut them off from divine pro¬
tection. The state of the body, gross as well
as subtle, thus provides an index of the state
of the soul, the Self. The wealth of the yogi
is his two-fold body and it is by an absolute
mastery of it that he can achieve salvation.
The gross body is said to have three
possible fates: it can be eaten as carrion
"* THE UNESCO ^)UR.ER« APRIL 1997

and reduced to excrement; it can be buried
and turned into maggots; or it can be burnt
and reduced to ashes. The putrefaction of
the body is regarded as particularly repel¬
lent by Hindus, and incineration is viewed
as the most acceptable fate since it is the
swiftest way of recycling the five elements
of which the body is composed. The body
particles of the dead return to be shared
with their kinsfolk and the soul is reborn.
A Hindu is never entirely new when born
and never entirely lost when dead.
religious cremation on the
banks of the Ganges near
Patna In northeastern India.
THE UNESCO ÇniRilERB APRIL 1997
31
