East áfrica
Silent partners
BY EVANGELINE LEDI BARONGO
B«>elow(from left to right),
3 children's books from East
Africa: Okot p'Bitek's Song of
Lawino and Song of Ocol, a
study of the conflict between
traditional African cultures
and Western ways; Hare and
Hornbill, an anthology of
stories inspired by the oral
tradition; A Son of Kabira, a
best-seller by Ugandan novelist
Davis Sebukima.
For centuries, children in East African
countries gathered around the fire, usu¬
ally after their evening meal, to listen to sto¬
ries told by their grandparents. Boys learned
about the exploits of brave men and legendary
hunters, while girls learned the secrets of a
successful marriage.
Today this tradition is disappearing. "Mod¬
ernized" stories for children are told in class¬
rooms, libraries and clubs by teachers and
librarians. Many parents and grandparents no
longer have the time to sit around the fire
telling stories, and even if they did, the
extended family is contracting. Most children
no longer live in villages with their grandpar¬
ents but with their parents in cities and towns.
One consequence of these changes is that
traditional stories are being passed down to the
next generation through a growing body of
children's books and the children's sections of
daily newspapers such as the Kampala (Uganda)
New Vision. Most of the books are published
in English, but quite a number are being writ¬
ten in the major African languages, especially
Kiswahili. The stories arc mainly based on
myths, folklore and legends, although some
of them contain sharp social commentary.
The authors tend to use their writing to send
a message to teach, criticize, or try to correct a
social injustice. Most try to help children to
learn about themselves and their community,
explaining how they arc expected to behave now
and when they become adults. Their books are
based on strong moral precepts.
My daughter is my fortune
The image of women as a commodity is pcrva- '
sivc. A Son ofKabira, a popular book by Ugan¬
dan author Davis Sebukima, tells the story of a
preacher, Nanziri, who says of his daughter, "I
shall make a fortune out of her." His attitude is
in line with traditional practice, especially in
rural areas, where daughters may be sold in mar¬
riages that make their parents a fortune.
In the same book, the author describes an
argument between two co-wives about the
best way to celebrate the homecoming of their
husband's son. When the husband intervenes,
he says, "Don't start shouting now, you will
disturb my head. It is as if you were beating a
drum in it." The women immediately stop
arguing and go away because they know their
husband has no interest in what they have to
say. He alone will decide what is to be done.
Solomon E.K. Mpalanyi's Ndikumma
Okolya also shows women meekly accepting
their subordinate role. When one of the char¬
acters tells her friends that her husband mis¬
treats her and probably has a lover, they are
unsympathetic and laugh at her predicament.
They agree that her husband's behaviour is
Okotp'Bitek^anô**
song of
lawino
©W»
inewa'

wrong, but tell her that she must put up with
it as a normal part of married life. In the local
language in which the book was written, they
say, "Take care, friend, your husband can beat
you up with your own stick."
Another image offered to child readers is
that of woman as a family servant. In one story
by Davis Sebukima, a carpenter with two wives
receives a visit from the village chief, whereupon
he calls his first wife and asks her to bring some
beer. The first wife is preparing lunch and so
the carpenter orders his second wife to serve the
beer. She is busy with the housework, but she
stops what she is doing, docs as she is asked
and, as tradition demands, kneels down, fills
the glasses and serves the men. She remains seated
and refills the glasses when the men empty them
until her co-wife brings in the lunch.
The message is that the woman must serve
the man. When the chief arrived, the carpenter's
wives were busy. He was doing nothing and
could easily have fetched the beer himself. But
this is not a husband's job, and so he ordered
his subservient wives to do it for him.
In Fixions, first published in Nairobi in
1969, Taban lo Liyong writes about an old
man so rich that he had married sixty-five
wives who had cost him 8,000 head of cattle in
bride price. Here the author is telling young
readers that a man's wealth, status, prestige
IYI other and son at a book
fair in Nairobi (Kenya).
and social respectability are judged by the
number of wives he has. This reflects the tra¬
ditional linkage in this part of Africa between
a man's wealth and the number of his wives. In
a predominantly peasant economy, this is
hardly surprising. The more wives a man has,
the more hands he has at his disposal to labour
in the fields and create wealth for him.
A recent book of talcs for young and adult
readers, IjukaKabumba's The Wedding Ring
and Other Stories (Kampala, 1992) describes a
conflict about land ownership between two
co-wives, Buyanja and Buhcsi. Their husband,
Gyenda, arbitrarily decides that all the land
is his alone and that neither of the wives has
any claim to it. They are to use the land to
produce food and crops to sell, but nothing
must be sold without his permission and any
money they make must be handed over to
him. He is also in charge of their recreation.
"I shall use my discretion to decide which of
you will accompany me to parties," he says.
Another story tells how Buyanja decides to
leave Gyenda and go back to her parents. How¬
ever, her father immediately decides to pack
her off back to her husband, without listen¬
ing to her or consulting his wife.
Both of these episodes underline one of
the dominant male attitudes in Uganda and in
Africa in general: wives, daughters, sisters and

women are not usually seen as decision mak¬
ers. This belief is formed at an early age, and
backed up by stories such as these.
African traditionalist or
Western copycat?
The main character in Okot p'Bitek's Song of
Lawino (Nairobi, 1972) is a young woman
named Lawino whose husband, Ocol, has had
a Western education. Their home is the scene of
a clash between traditional African culture rep¬
resented by Lawino and modern culture rep¬
resented by Ocol. Ocol recites a litany of com¬
plaints against his wife. She can't dance foreign
dances like the rumba and the samba; she has
an old-fashioned hair-do; she still cooks with
firewood instead of a Primus stove; she doesn't
know the names of the months; she doesn't
have a Christian name and is ignorant of the
word of God contained in the "Clean Book"
(the Bible).
Lawino begs her husband to understand
her and to respect their African culture. She
tries to get him to appreciate the beauty of
traditional dances and her Acholi hairstyle.
She tells him that the clay pots she uses for
cooking millet cannot be used on Primus
stoves, and adds that she knows the names of
the calendar months perfectly well, but only
in her people's Acholi language. Acholi names
like hers, she says, arc full of significance
because they convey messages, commemorate
events and bestow honour and recognition
for service to society. Christian names lack this
kind of significance.
The Song ofLawino is a powerful defence
of African culture, especially the culture and
respectability of the African woman, who is
depicted as a conservative traditionalist.
A very different image is presented In
Joseph Buruga's book, The Abandoned Hut
f\ Ugandan schoolteacher
marks her pupils' exercises.
L
^.lùLùL A . ^
(Nairobi, 1972), which portrays the African
woman as a copycat of European cultures, val¬
ues and life-styles.
Buruga tells the story of a man who asks a
woman named Basia why she has rejected him.
Without waiting for an answer he tells her
how he prefers his own culture and hates it
being adulterated by alien values like those
that have "spoilt" her. "Oh, Basia," he laments,
"you rejected me because I do not like your
ways. . . . You want us to go to the houses
[nightclubs] where people gather to drink
colourless liquids which at times look like
blood [red wine]." He explains that he is
against indoor drinking and dancing places
because the dancing keeps people up until the
early hours of the morning and because the
dancers are not involved in making music
(singing, drumming, etc.) but merely dance
to music produced by others. For him, this is
like being visited by spirits or attending the
funeral of a dead friend or relative.
"The Kakwa (African) people drink in the
open under the shade of trees or house veran¬
dahs," he says. "They drink when the sun is
still up in the sky. When night comes, the
drinking party closes until the following day.
The night is the time for night-dancers
(witches) to roam through the villages like
lost bulls."
Here the author is trying to tell his young
readers how important it is to take pride in tra¬
ditional African culture, while also describ¬
ing a widespread social phenomenon at a time
when many young African women frequented
nightclubs, bleached their skin to make it
lighter and wore wigs so that they seemed to
have long hair like European girls.
\ Social change
This image of women is to a large extent a true
reflection of reality. Society, not the authors,
are to blame for this. In recent times, how¬
ever, great strides have been made by women's
organizations and government policies to pro¬
vide greater opportunities for women. In
Uganda, for example, women arc involved in
national development at all levels. There is a
fully fledged Ministry of Women in Devel¬
opment and more than forty women parlia¬
mentarians in a House of some 280 members.
The principle of including women in public
decision-making is replicated in political orga¬
nizations right down to village level. In sum,
the role of women in society is improving
rapidly and spectacularly.
The authors of children's books cannot
fail to be aware of these developments, and it
is to be hoped that they will soon be offering
their readers far more positive images of
women than they have until now. H
l¿
