COMMENTARY Federico Mayor
cience and society (1)
>>
Scientists, politicians and
scientific research
The Second World War marked a turning point in the rela¬
tions between science and government. It was then, for
example, that the first science adviser to the White House
was recruited. This kind of assignment was something quite
new to those who had hitherto earned their living mainly by
research or the teaching of science.
While scientific research and government were becom¬
ing indispensable to each other, traditional policy-making
procedures were becoming obsolete.
A dangerous shift
Science has come to impinge more and more on society, to
some extent vindicating faith in the scientific enterprise,
but giving rise to doubts about human capacity for the wise
management of its applications. Increasingly science has
had to respond to many different and not always convergent
interests in society and enter into a relationship with many
different groups, including industry, government depart¬
ments, the academic community and tax-payers. The tradi¬
tional boundary between scientific practice and science
policy has become blurred. The issues, though still scien¬
tific in nature, are also economic, political, social and cul¬
tural. It is increasingly apparent that the traditional model
of science-and-technology decision-making, in which experts
in their various fields offer advice in confidence to decision-
THE UNESCO QïURIERB MARCH 1997

makers whose interests and reflexes are often more political
than scientific, will no longer serve.
Where a ministry or an equivalent body lays down pol¬
icy guidelines for scientific research, it is often not suffi¬
ciently separate from day-to-day politics to maintain the
long-term perspective required in this sphere. Further¬
more, responsibility for science and technology policy is
often sectorally divided, which is not conducive to the
development of an integrated policy or the promotion of
research in frontier areas cutting across traditional fields.
There is also an unfortunate tendency for the interests of
science to be sacrificed to expediency for example, to
short-term economic considerations or the government's
need to achieve immediate results in order to stay in power.
Decisions and disagreements
Matters are not helped by the fact that science invariably
speaks with many voices. Despite their commitment to objec¬
tivity, technical advisers rarely agree once they stray out¬
side the realm of hard science. "When issues related to sci¬
ence and technology having strong political content . . .
come to the fore," Frederick Seitz, a past president of the
American National Academy of Sciences, has said, "it is
always relatively easy to find individuals with good pro¬
fessional qualifications to argue, even vehemently, in sup¬
port of either side." This accords undue power to decision¬
makers who then make choices based on their interests
and/or biases, using so-called scientific evidence in sup¬
port of what is in effect a foregone conclusion.
The lack of agreement among scientists reflects the com¬
plexity of the issues, which invariably involve a complex
combination of fields and require a holistic approach for
their solution. Scientists by themselves cannot be expected
to provide a complete answer to such questions. It is impor¬
tant that the spectrum of expert advice should be extended
to ensure inputs from all relevant fields.
Afresh approach
What is required is to move away from what has been termed
"decisionist action" whereby government decrees policy
based almost exclusively on expertise provided by the sci
entific and technological community to an approach
whereby the government takes into consideration the views
of the different protagonists with their diverse values and
standpoints. An effort should also be made to raise the gen¬
eral level of scientific and technological culture to opti¬
mize societal participation and support.
But this would require some fundamental changes of
attitude on the part of scientists and politicians alike. Sci¬
entists would have to develop a greater sensitivity to the
social and political impact of the advice they proffer. Politi¬
cians, for their part, would have to cede some of their deci¬
sion-making power to the experts, while learning to accept
the inevitable quota of uncertainty and instability in the
advice received.
The role of expert advice must, therefore, be redefined
in such a way as to emphasize the importance of scientifi¬
cally based decision-making while excluding any idealized
vision of enlightenment through scientific rationality. The
goal should be to arrive, through the marshalling and con¬
frontation of advice in all relevant fields, at the choices best
adapted to each situation. The diagnosis on which policy is
based should be as complete as possible, but it must also be
made in time. If we wait too long, "the patient may die", or irre¬
versible damage may be caused. Irreversibility is a key cri¬
terion. Postponement could lead to a point of no return.
Thought also needs to be given to the increasing
unwieldiness of scientific and technological institutions
with their multitude of decision-making centres. They should
be trimmed down to manageable proportions so that respon¬
sibilities can be more readily pinpointed and the risks of
duplication lessened. That being said, the hubris of over-
planning must be avoided. Scientific creativity cannot be
regulated. Policy decisions in certain areas of fundamental
research must remain with the scientists concerned such
autonomy being the very condition of those qualitative
advances in understanding that are ultimately as crucial to
the applied as they are to the basic sciences. In the words
of Bernardo Houssay, "there are no applied sciences if
there is no science to apply".
THE UNESCO ^_OURIERB MARCH 1097 ^b
