Some Islamic thinkers believe that cultivation of the
senses can lead to God
he garden ofdelights
BY ABDELWAHAB MEDDEB
According to the Book of the Lad¬
der of Mahomet, as the Prophet
was beginning his "night journey"
_ from Mecca to Jerusalem, a very
beautiful woman "clad in raiment of every
imaginable colour" called out to him. He
stopped and allowed her to draw near to
him, then went disdainfully on his way.
Whereupon his guide, the angel Gabriel,
told him that the woman with her garments
of many colours represented the world with
its manifold delights, and that "because you
waited for her, your people shall be granted
more solace and more delights than any
other people that has been or shall be."
This anecdote, taken from a medieval
work of fiction that was translated from
Arabic into Latin, Spanish and French in
the thirteenth century, has more to tell us
than any of the standard works of law or
theology. Islam had the reputation of being
the religion of enjoyment, a religion that
called upon its followers not to spurn
earthly pleasures but to delight in them as
God's blessed gift to humankind.
The promise held out by Islam to
believers seems to be that of a garden
overflowing with everything to gratify the
senses. This was the charge laid against
Islam in the inter-religious disputes that
raged in the Middle Ages, especially in Al-
Andalus (Muslim Spain). The late thir¬
teenth-century Catalan theologian Ramon
Llull, for instance, makes such charges in
his Book of the Three Sages, in which a
Jew, a Christian and a Muslim take turns in
vaunting the merits of their respective reli¬
gions to apagan.
Such enjoyment of earthly delights in
the name of God was, on the other hand,
much appreciated by nineteenth-century
Western writers and artists who visited
the East. This experience took them out¬
side of their Judaeo-Christian education,
which seemed either to repudiate the plea¬
sures of the flesh or to regard them as base
instincts that ought to be eliminated.
Reacting against the prudery prevailing in
their own countries, they saw in Islam an
alternative life-style, around which grew
the myth of an Orient where nihilism and
denial of the flesh were unknown.
In Ecce Homo, Nietzsche, who
acclaimed this worship of the body,
recalled that the first thing the Christians
did after recapturing Córdoba was to brick
up the city's 700 hammams. These bath¬
houses, which were the latter-day equiv¬
alent of the public baths of Roman Antiq¬
uity and which reflected the central place
accorded in Islam to the care of the body,
were seen by a Christian morality based on
asceticism, abstinence and penitence as
places of debauchery and depravity.
For their part, many writers succumbed
to the charms of Arab erotic literature. The
Thousand and One Nights had been well
known since the late seventeenth century,
but the French translation by Antoine Gal-
land had been expurgated, the crude or
downright pornographic passages being
toned down in keeping with the classical '
principle of decorum. The fact is that Arab
and Muslim authors were not afraid to write
about wild sexual abandon and the trans¬
ports of delight, which was why at the
beginning of the twentieth century Mardrus
thought it necessary to retranslate these
tales, in so doing even exaggerating their
sexual rhetoric.
32
THE UNESCO (OURIIERB APRIL 1997

" I he Lovers", a detail from
a 19th-century Iranian
edition of the Thousand and
One Nights.
<$^*ij/</*hf^
y~f.u¿ ¡uiujti/ '^/^/^JW^^'
y¿C~*4tf,ü>f'ó¿/1 'Ci^ôûi o ¿(f¿s/W¿>)l
_ '
iL.S/. rS.
I * - - i. m
I
THEUNESCO ^)URIERB APRIL 1997 33

Such exaggeration is a measure of the
spell cast by this different world, where
prudery was unknown and people made
love in the name of God. The fin-de-siè¬
cle aesthetes' ideas of the sensualism of



the East and of Islam was confirmed by
their discovery of The Perfumed Garden,
an erotic treatise that was written in the
fourteenth century by a theologian born in
southern Tunisia, the famous Shaykh
Nefzawi, and the anonymous nineteenth-
century French translation of which is
reputed to have been reworked by Guy
de Maupassant.
Their ideas were in fact scarcely exag¬
gerated: the Murcia-born Andalusian
M.lusic and dancing. An
illustration from a 17th-
century anthology of Persian
poetry.
theosopher Ibn al-Arabi (1165-1240)
believed that those of a perspicacious mind
could discern revelations behind all forms
of beauty and derive enjoyment from
them, and that such was the secret of spir¬
itual experience. Did not the Hadith pro¬
claim that "God is beautiful and He loves
beauty"? Within each thing of beauty there
lies concealed an image of God that the
individual may perceive through a lovely
woman, a handsome youth, a garment of
well-matched colours, a harmoniously
proportioned object, a stirring song, a well-
seasoned dish, architecture that creates a
musical interplay of light and shadow, a
courtyard where a tinkling fountain over-,
flows into its basin, or a bed of flowers in
a shady garden fragrant with the scents of
spring.
In short, the presence of God is to be
sought through the senses: all things that
appeal to the senses are ways whereby
God may be glimpsed and the mental
image of God may be formed. This con¬
ception may explain how it is that the prin¬
ciple of beauty finds its way into the most
prosaic objects in use in the most mun¬
dane circumstances, and it is perhaps
because of this belief in the immanence of
beauty that the decorative arts and crafts
flourished at that time.
Again according to Ibn al-Arabi, how¬
ever, it is in the carnal act itself that the
supreme revelation is granted. Through
the mystery of the female orgasm, through
its very excess, the individual is immersed
in the image of God. In the love-making of
two people, man and woman, the pres¬
ence of a third, God Himself, is thus made
manifest. This accounts for the extreme
importance Ibn al-Arabi attaches to phys¬
ical love: it is through physical love that
spiritual love is achieved, it is through the
sexual act, by the transmission of the elixir
of carnal pleasure, that humans rise to the
height of divine love. Ibn al-Arabi quotes
another tradition from the Hadith in sup¬
port of his interpretation: the Prophet said
"Three things have I loved in this world:
perfume, women and prayer". The shape
of things conducive to the gratification of
the senses and the call to fulfil the obliga¬
tion of worship are thus set forth side by
side in Holy Writ.
THE
UNESCO lOURIERl APRIL 1997
