What, my brother, is an island?
BY LOKENATH BHATTACHARYA
Where the waters
of the Ganges
meet the ocean The memory of a folk-song heard in
childhood, in a dialect of Bengali, comes
back to me:
What, my brother, is an island once you've
left it?
It's nothing, nothing, nothing.
What, my brother, is an island if it's not
yourself?
In our ancient texts, too, insularity is the
self, covering and surpassing the universe. They
describe Jambudvîpa (island of Jambu) as one
of the seven immense insular land masses, all
symbols of fertility and abundance and each
surrounded by one of the seven seas of salt
water, sugar-cane juice, wine, clarified butter,
curds, milk and fresh water. Jambudvîpa is
India itself, marked at its centre by the golden
mountain Meru, on which stands an enor-
mous jambu (rose-apple) tree.
Another tale almost as old as eternity
describes the meeting of the Ganges with the
ocean. The Sanskrit epic, the Mahâbhârata,
tells how the sage Kapila, lost in meditation in
the nether world, burned to ashes all the 16,000
sons of Sagara, a king of the Solar race.
Another sage, Bhagîratha, through long
asceticism and persistent prayers, made the
river Ganges descend from heaven to sanctify
the victims' ashes, thereby creating the ocean,
one of the Sanskrit words for which is sâgara,
from the name of the king, Sagara.
To celebrate that sacred event, a three-day
Pilgrims sailing to the island
of Sagar in the Ganges delta.

A sandbank In the Ganges near
the Indian city of Kanpur.
bathing festival and fair are held each year on
the Indian island of Sâgar near Calcutta in the
Ganges Delta, a huge, low-lying, densely pop¬
ulated, fertile area belonging partly to India
but mostly to Bangladesh.
The delta's westernmost island, Sâgar is
awesome and mysterious in appearance, and
regularly swept by cyclones. It is here that the
Ganges once met the ocean, and although
The island and the pilgrimage also feature
in Kapâlakundalâ, a love story set against a
background of gruesome rites published in
1866 by the pioneering Bengali novelist
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee. Kapâlakundalâ is
a vivid account of how a young man return¬
ing from the Sâgar Island pilgrimage rescues an
innocent maiden from the clutches of a prac¬
titioner of human sacrifice, a hermit-priest
strictly speaking the ocean is now further whose body is smeared with ashes from a
away, sky and water remain the island's all-
pervasive backdrop.
The festival is attended by many millions
of people devotees, saints, frauds, cheats,
tourists, all combined representing all Hindu
sects and all the states of India. Some of the
sâdhus (holy men) who make the pilgrimage
funeral pile and who holds, as a cup, a skull in
his left hand. The maiden and the young hero
are destined to be his victims, a fate from
which they narrowly escape.
Such esoteric practices were once a part of life
in this region. The very shape of the Ganges
Delta, with the vast tract of forest and swamp
to Sâgar are ascetics who stay naked all the year forming its lower part and known as the Sun-
round and practise the most rigorous physi- derbans, evokes the human female organ (yoni) ,
cal disciplines. They live as hermits, and this and the cults and images associated with it:
pilgrimage is the only occasion when they womb, vulva, origin, source, nest, home,
leave the isolation of their caves in the And thus it is that the cycle becomes corn-



Himalayas, where the descent of the Ganges plete and we return to our starting point:
originally took place. what, my brother, is an island?
