FACT FILE Island World
TWENTY KEY ISSUES
IN ISLAND DEVELOPMENT
1. Sustainable development Islands are less able to absorb environ¬
mental effects than larger areas. Understanding and implementing strate¬
gies of sustainable development are major challenges for island com¬
munities.
2. Diversity. Islands vary considerably in size and population. The problems
they confront derive in varying degrees from their smallness, a limited
resource base and their susceptibility to storm damage and drought.
3. Open, specialized economies: Often dependent for foreign exchange
on the export of one or two specialist crops, small islands may be obliged
to import many consumer goods, including food.
4. Private sector involvement: The private sector has much to contribute
to development policy. Transnational and local companies have a major
responsibility with regard to waste management, toxic materials control
and energy conservation.
5. Distortions in island economies: Social transfer payments can lead
to distortions of the economy whose effects have not always been fully rec¬
ognized.
6. Transport: Transport services between small islands and the outside
world are often difficult to establish and costly.
7. Demographic issues: Small islands are subject to cycles of rapid demo¬
graphic change that go far beyond those related to the balance between
natural birth- and death-rates.
8. Employment Small population size and migration mean that the fine
balance between supply and demand of human resources is easily upset.
9. Decision-making: Integration of scientific concepts into managing
island environments is often given low political priority.
10. Natural resources: Natural resources, on which sustainable devel¬
opment ultimately depends, are among the most vulnerable sectors of an
island's assets.
11. Forestry. Conservation of forest cover is vital for small islands to pro¬
tect their watersheds and guard against soil erosion.
12. Land management Land-use problems on islands largely result from
the conflict between change and development and traditional systems,
resulting In the fragmentation of landholdings.
13. Water. Only the largest and wettest high islands have ample water
resources, and even on some of these there are seasonal shortages.
14. Energy. Many islands depend almost totally on imported fossil fuels,
although use of wood and charcoal continues. Solar energy is already
important on some islands and biogas digesters are in use in a few areas.
15. Conservation: Small islands are often sites of rare but fragile ecosys¬
tems, many of which are in danger of disappearing through lack of con¬
servation policies.
16. Coastal and marine ecosystems: Unregulated industrial and tourist
development projects can cause permanent damage.
17. Fisheries: Island fisheries in the tropics and the Mediterranean are
mainly small-scale and conducted on artisanal lines. Fishing for export is
hampered by poor catching, storing and marketing capacities.
18. Agriculture: Island agricultural systems range from subsistence farm¬
ing to the production of export cash crops. The fall In demand for sugar¬
cane and copra has been a serious blow to certain island economies.
19. Industry. The smallness of islands is a severe constraint on indus¬
trial development. There is, however, some scope for value-adding semi-
manufacture.
20. Tourism and allied services: tourism means heavy investment in Infra¬
structure.

Heritage Sites Australia: Fraser Island (1992),
Lord Howe Island (1982)
Canada: Anthony Island (1981)
Chile: Rapa Nui National Park, Easter
Island (1995)
Ecuador: Galapagos Islands (1978)
Indonesia: Komodo National Park
(Komodo Islands) (1991)
Japan: Yakushima (Yaku Island)
(1993)
Mozambique: Island of Mozambique
(1991)
United Kingdom: St. Kilda Island
(1986); Henderson Island (1988);
Gough Island Wildlife Reserve
(1995)
Senegal: Island of Gorée (1978)
Seychelles: Aldabra Atoll (1982)
Viet Nam: Ha Long Bay (1994)
Left, Komodo National Park
(Indonesia). Below, Fraser Island
(Australia), the world's largest sand
island. Below left, Ha Long Bay, In the
Gulf of Tonkin (Viet Nam).
