ODYANDTHEUOOK
BY DAVID BIALE
In the Bible, the foundational text of
Judaism, the body is treated primarily
in the context of the cultic laws of



j purity. These laws dictate who is pure
enough to enter a sacred site and offer a
sacrifice. Anyone who has touched a dead
human body, for example, is considered
impure. Similarly, certain diseases, such as
some skin disorders, cause impurity. Most
normal body functions, such as urination or
defecation, do not create impurity, while
those related to the sexual organs, such as
seminal ejaculation, menstruation and
pathological bleeding from the genitals, do
render a person and his or her sexual part¬
ner impure.
The impurity related to genital dis¬
charges, both normal and abnormal, is puz¬
zling, since the priestly laws, in which we
find these prohibitions, regard sexuality
very positively. The biblical priests appear
to have been quite preoccupied with ques¬
tions of fertility and it is they who authore d
the divine blessings "be fruitful and multi¬
ply." Why did such authors regard sexual
fluids as impure, if they wished to affirm
sexuality? The answer seems to be that such
fluids were seen as divine substances whose
very power created impurity when they
left the body.
Another aspect of the body regarded as
divine was blood, although normal bleed¬
ing did not create impurity. The biblical
authors believed that blood is the life-force
and that spilling blood was a violation of
the divine order. The blood of animals was
not to be eaten, but instead returned to
God in a ceremony expiating the sin of
THE UNESCO ÇlURIER» APRIL 1997 M

killing the animal. Spilling human blood
could not, however, be expiated in the
same way. Instead, the only atonement
for killing a human being was to execute
the murderer. The Bible's very severe law
of capital punishment was a product of
this holy status of human blood.
The Jewish religion is not based only
on the Bible. In the first centuries of the
Common Era, a parallel body of law, called
the "Oral Law" or "rabbinic law," was for¬
mulated and set in writing byJewish schol¬
ars called rabbis. Although rabbinic law
had some of its foundations in the Bible,
much of it reflected the prevailing issues
of Greco-Roman culture, which was the
^culture in which the rabbis lived. Thus,
the attitude towards the body in rabbinic
literature can best be understood in the
context of late antiquity.
For Greco-Roman thinkers, such as



the Stoic philosophers, the body itself
posed less of a problem than did the pas¬
sions, which could overpower one's rea¬
son. The rabbis were also preoccupied
with the passions, which they called the
yetzer ha-ra (the "evil impulse"). They
held that the law is designed to restrain
and channel the passions into construc¬
tive activities. But the body itself they gen¬
erally viewed as a neutral vessel. There
are, to be sure, negative statements about
women's bodies in rabbinic literature, but
they are typically in the context of the anx¬
iety of the rabbis, who were all men, about
women distracting them from the holy
duty to study.
The vehiclefor the soul
The rabbis did not believe in a division
between the body and the soul. One rab¬
binic saying held that the soul is like a lame
man riding on the back of a blind man.
Thus the body provides the necessary
vehicle for the soul, although, by itself, it is
morally blind. The soul is always embod¬
ied and, in messianic times, the body will
be resurrected with the soul. However,
at least one rabbi held that in messianic
times "there will be no eating, drinking or
procreation." For this particular school of
thought, the body in a "perfected" world
would not have the same drives and needs
as bodies in this world.
This last point brings up the question of
the rabbinic attitude towards sexuality. In
general, the rabbis affirmed sexuality and
held that all men must marry and father
children (the law in this case is only directed
towards men). Men also have an additional
obligation to give sexual pleasure to their
wives. At the same time, the rabbis had
ambivalent feelings about male sexuality.
Their position seemed to be that the sexual
desires of the body are legitimate and even
holy, but only if the sexual act is performed
with the proper restraint. Sex must be
potentially procreative, so that, for example,
masturbation is labeled a capital crime,
something unknown to the Bible. While
the rabbis never endorsed celibacy, as did
the Christian Church fathers, there is strong
evidence that they were also attracted by
scholarly abstinence. In some texts, the
study of Torah (biblical and rabbinic law) is
invested with eroticism, suggesting that
intellectual activity might compete with
the desires of the body.
Rabbinic law extended biblical law into
virtually every area of life. As such, it gov-
erned almost every aspect and function
of the body, from eating to sex. Although
rabbinic literature is generally motivated
by interpretation of the law, which the rab¬
bis believed was revealed at Mt. Sinai, it
also contains a great deal of medical spec¬
ulation. For example, the rabbis devoted
considerable attention to trying to under¬
stand female reproductive physiology and
their theories often owed much to late
antique medicine. They were particularly
concerned with the details of women's
menstrual cycle, since the law prohibited
sexual relations during menstruation. They
developed a whole science of menstrual
blood to distinguish between healthy and
pathological female bleeding. Reading rab¬
binic literature confirms the observation
(meant to be derogatory) of the first-cen¬
tury Christian, Paul, that Judaism is truly
"Israel of the flesh."
Proper intention
In the Middle Ages, the rabbinic insistence
on the unity of body and soul began to
break down under the influence of Greek
philosophers such as Aristotle and Ploti-
nus, who became known to Jewish
thinkers through the Arabs. Jewish
philosophers, such as Moses Maimonides
(1 135-1204), often denigrated the body as
representing the purely material. It is the
soul that gives form to matter and there¬
fore invests it with holiness. Maimonides
was particularly harsh in denouncing sex¬
uality as a negative impulse of the material
i Jewish marriage in Paris
(France).
THE UNESCO I OURIERB APRIL 1997

body. He condemned the sense of touch
as the lowest of all human faculties. Yet



Maimonides was also a physician and
expounder of Jewish law. Both of these
disciplines taught him the importance of
cultivating the body and attending to its
needs and desires. Maimonides therefore
tried to strike a middle ground between
his philosophical asceticism and the bod¬
ily affirmations of medicine and Jewish
law. His doctrine with respect to the body
emphasized moderation and self-control.
A different school of thought in the
Jewish Middle Ages was the mystical
(often called "Kabbalah"). The mystics or
Kabbalists sometimes began their specu¬
lations in explicit rejection of Maimonides.
An important thirteenth-century text
called the Iggeret ha-Kodesh ("Letter of
Holiness") starts off by criticizing Mai¬
monides' stand on the body. How could
the sense of touch be evil, since God had
created the body and called it "good"? In
particular, the text insists that Adam and
Eve had had sexual relations in the Gar¬
den of Eden and had done so without any
sinful pleasure (this was a theme that could
be found in both early rabbinic and Chris¬
tian literature). But, as much as the "Letter
of Holiness" sought to affirm the body, it
also placed severe limitations on it. If men
and women engaged in sexual relations
without the proper intention, then the
purely physical act became a form of idol¬
atry.
"The Letter of Holiness" placed such
enormous importance on correct inten-
tionality because of the Kabbalistic theol¬
ogy which underlay it. According to this
mystical tradition, God himself consists
of male and female elements, which are
engaged in a kind of spiritual intercourse.
Proper human sexuality can be directed
towards God by the correct thoughts. In
this way, human sexual relations actually
cause the male and female elements in God
to unite sexually. Improper sexuality or
improper thoughts cause these elements
to break apart. Thus, human sexuality has
cosmic consequences.
In a similar way, all human activities can
magically influence God. The Kabbalists
describe God in anthropomorphic terms,
that is, as having a body just like a human
body. This divine body lacks materiality:
we might call it a "spiritual" body. But since
God's body is the model for human bod¬
ies, the way in which human beings use
their bodies can affect God's body. If
human beings remain trapped in their
material, bodily desires, then they subvert
the spirituality of God's body. The task of
humans is to spiritualize their material bod¬
ies and bring them into harmony with the
divine body.
I The resurrection of the body
This doctrine from the thirteenth century
was to have tremendous implications for
Jewish thought in the subsequent cen¬
turies. In the eighteenth century, a pietis-
tic Jewish movement in Poland, called
Hasidism, created a popular theology
based on the earlier Kabbalah. The
Hasidim held that every action of the body
might be turned into a spiritual act since
ev erything in the material world contains
a spark of the divine.
Some Hasidic doctrines celebrated the
material world and spoke of worshipping
God through the material. A common
Hasidic teaching held, for example, that
even the simple act of eating or drinking
could be transformed into the worship of
God with the proper intentionality. Oth¬
ers, on the other hand, saw the purpose of
the worship of God as emptying the mate¬
rial of its divinity. This latter approach,
sometimes termed "the annihilation of the
material," led to a much more ascetic
THE UNESCO COLIRIERB APRIL 1997 M

approach to the body, particularly in the
realm of sexuality. For these Hasidic mas¬
ters, any sexual act that involved pleasure
was sinful.



The eighteenth century also witnessed
the emergence of a movement of Jewish
enlightenment which challenged the world
of rabbinic and medieval Judaism. Part of
the critique of the Jewish enlighteners
focused on the treatment of the body in
traditional Judaism. For example, they
argued that the practice of early marriage,
which was common among the Jews of
eastern Europe, led to disease and bodily
weakness. They also wished to reform the
way Jews dressed to make them look
more "European". And they sought to
transform traditional attitudes towards
sexuality into something like emerging
bourgeois values.
A much more radical critique of tradi¬
tional attitudes towards the body devel¬
oped at the end of the nineteenth century
among the inheritors of the Jewish enlight¬
enment. With the rise of European anti-
semitism and the perceived failure of Jew¬
ish emancipation, secular Jewish thinkers
turned towards nationalist solutions of the
Jewish question. These nationalists adopted
and extended the earlier Enlightenment
critique of traditional Judaism. Traditional
Judaism, they argued, had denigrated the
body in favour of pure spirituality and, as a
result, Jews had become physically weak
and politically impotent. They wished to
return bodily vigour to the Jews by creat
ing what the Zionist ideologue Max Nordau
called "muscular Judaism." Following the
fashionable medical diagnosis of the time,
Jews were considered "neurasthenics"
(victims of a disorder of the nerves). The
only way to cure this nervous disease was
to strengthen the muscles. Consequently,
a whole movement of Jewish gymnastic
and sporting clubs developed to transform
the Jewish body.
The Zionists took this critique one step
further by insisting that the only real way
to transform the Jewish body was to trans¬
plant it to the soil of Palestine. Only in a
Jewish society based on agriculture rather
than petty commerce (the typical occu¬
pation of the European Jews) could Jews
become physically strong. This nationalist
ideal was based on a mythic vision of the
healthy Jews of the Bible, as opposed to
the weak and diseased Jews of the Dias¬
pora, but it was equally inspired by other
European nationalisms, which also
engaged in a cult of the body.
One might say that, far from negating
Jewish tradition, this secular nationalism
unconsciously continued a persistent motif
in historical Judaism: the centrality of the
body. From the Bible, to rabbinic litera¬
ture, medieval philosophy and mysticism,
the body in all of its facets has played a cru¬
cial role in Jewish thought, at times affirmed
and at others denied, but never ignored. In
the final analysis, the "people of the book"
can never be divorced from the "people
of the body."
In Cameroon, right, as in
other parts of Africa, masks,
costumes and symbolic
objects are widely used in
traditional ceremonies.
rt traditional Friday evening
Jewish family meal In Hadera
(Israel).
W THE UNESCO LAURIER« APRIL 1997
