interview
Lebanese-born poet, novelist
and playwright Andrée Chedid
has published overthirty books
including (in English
translation) Selected Poems
(1996), Multiple Child (1995)
and From Sleep Unbound
(1987). From her standpoint at
the crossroads of several
cultures she is an alert observer
of the tensions and divisions
of the modern world. In this
interview with Martine Leca, she
voices her commitment to
freedom in direct, simple
terms.
'An inner
freedom'
You often take the themes of your novels fro m
the Bible	
Andrée Chedid: When they coincide with topical
issues. If I only took my ideas from current events
their range might be limited and they would fail
to achieve a universal dimension. By bringing
together the present and the distant past, myths
are universal and open up avenues for exploring
all the facets of human nature. When you
immerse yourself in current affairs, you get car¬
ried away on the tide of events. Our inner life
suffers if our eyes are glued to what is going on
around us, whereas myth makes us steji back.
According to you, the world would be a more
tolerant place if it were ruled by women.
A. 0: A good question. Guided by their maternal
instinct, women would probably he less naturally
inclined to resort to physical violence. Rut every¬
one tends to be corrupted by power, and women are
no exception. Would women continue to he peace-
loving if they were in power? The common good can
only he based on equitable power-sharing between
the sexes, not by denying part of humanity.
You know a lot about Middle Eastern women.
How would you define their status?
A. C: Women in the Middle East are caught up in
a tide that ebbs and flows. They become the
beneficiaries of certain social changes, and then,
lo and behold, just when they are starting to
adjust to these changes, along comes a counter-
current that makes society move backwards.
Some kinds of freedom appeared in Middle Piast¬
ern countries, but they ebbed away as a result of
fundamentalist obscurantism. When I was young,
I thought the world was moving steadily forward
in a straight line. Rut there are slow-downs and
U-turns. I believe that human destiny is subject
to cyclical movements of this kind. This does not
mean that we should stop looking towards the
future, towards progress. My novel Les marches
de sable, for example, explores the innermost
fears, the hopes and the retreats as well as the
ideological and theological struggles that mark
these cycles. Whereas religion should ennoble
us, take us out of ourselves and make us more
humane, it can build walls between people.
You always try to steer clear of ideologies and
conventions.
A. C: Yes, as far as possible. I base my life on
the word freedom. I don't like being kept on a
lead. But this calls for eternal vigilance because
life is full of traps of which we are unawarecon¬
ventionality, unscrupulous ambition, age, tak¬
ing oneself too seriously. I try to elude all labels
and, of course, classification arisingfrommy ori¬
gins and culture. Age is a label one is old or
one is young. Other labels are blood, gender and
soil. I distrust anything that confines a person
to a specific station in life. There is something in
us that is so much larger, a sort of flame, an inner
freedom that defies definition. This indefinable
quality must constantly be reconsidered and

renamed. That is what I try to examine through
poetry, the form of expression I cherish the most.
One recurrent theme in your books is coming
and going between the city and the desert and vice
versa.
A. C: That is an unending process that ni) char¬
acters are pushed into by their instinct. Cities
for me mean freedom; they are places where peo¬
ple can escape from themselves and their back¬
ground. City life allows people to blend in with the
population, with others, without being chained to
them. If 1 lived in a village, I would feel that 1
belonged there; I wouldn't experience this self-
deliverance that the solitude of city life affords
me. City life makes it possible to expand, to be
with other people within minutes and to talk to
them in the midst of a crowd. You can walk in
the city without being disturbed. And poetry is all
around you. You just have to stop and observe.
What about the desert?
A. C: It's a place where you can make a fresh start
after you've been through some kind of ordeal.
It's a place for putting things together, for con¬
templation and simplicity. For dropping your
guard. It's a form of training in asceticism and
endurance, and a kind of filter. My characters go
into the desert to lick their moral wounds. Anas¬
tasia, for example, the heroine of Les marches de
sable, thinks only of emerging from this ordeal in
the desert, the crossing of which has purified and
strengthened her. Rut the teaching of the desert
is sterile if it is not taken back to the city. After the
desert, one has to return to the human world. It is
also important to listen to the desert in oneself. It
helps to take the sting out of death, to greet it
every day as an inevitable companion, so that we can
exorcise it and welcome it when the time comes. It's
impossible to see life clearly unless one has thought
about death at an early age. Death is a certainty
our only certainty and a scale of values. What
comes after, I don't know.
Is your work a quest for continuity?
A. C: My work is a step forward in this world, not
in the hereafter. It is this side of our existence
that concerns me. We keep on asking ourselves
the same questions where have we come from?
where are we going? and no philosopher, sci¬
entist or poet has ever answered them satisfac¬
torily. I am amazed every day that I exist as a
physical being through this combination of mol¬
ecules that I am made of. I'm not talking about
beauty, make-up or appearance. I wonder how
this factory of being with all its complicated
mechanisms has managed to take shape. This
Through writing
we bring together our body
and our mind
extraordinary mystery is enough for me. That is
why I don't try to pierce the mysteries of the
after-life, of the be)ond.
Is your whole life built around writing?
A. C: For me writing and life are inseparable.
Writing enriches life. But I'm not a metronome;
I can get by for a while without writing. The ges¬
tation of a book, for example, calls for a lot of
thought and imagination. Something builds up
inside me, and ink then traces on paper the
course of its development. But the desire to write
never leaves me. It is always there, coiled up
inside me, and if after a while no writing appears,
1 start to feel rather uncomfortable, because my
life is no longer harmonious. For me, writing is
like the act of love, which amplifies, sublimates
life and gives it a luminous tension. It puts mein
step with this inner vibration, this desire that 1
feel deep within me. Without it, purely mater¬
ial life is incomplete.
Isn't it self-centred, this act of love you describe
as part of writing?
A. C: Writing, when compared to the work of a
Mother Teresa or a great doctor, to the suffering
they alleviate and the difficulties they face, can
sometimes seem lightweight and facile, almost
like fun. But as the French philosopher Gaston
Rachelard wrote, we are "real and unreal", and
if we do not combine the real and the unreal, we
are traumatized because we are incomplete.
Through writing we bring together our body and
our mind. Poetry is an act of love, and love gives
you inspiration. This is not just love between a
man and a woman, but universal love. When I go
out into the street, when I mingle with the
crowds, I lov r others. I observ e them. I immerse
myself in them. The crowd is the clay from which
I mould my poems and novels. All these fleeting
moments with others nourish life, the force with¬
out which we would sink into the void that lies
in wait for us.

You have restored a sense of poetry to the novel.
A. C: Poetry is asking questions at the deepest
level, an attempt to get to the bottom of things.
The act of writing is a moment of purification,
deployment and self-condensation during which
the writer is balanced on a thin wire strung
between alpha and omega. It is a moment to ask
questions about the purpose and the essence of
things. I feel very close to the Japanese poets
who write haiku, those formal seventeen-syllable
poems where the radiance of the essential flows
through the ink. I like to write briefly and suc¬
cinctly. A poem of a few lines often results from
a long chain of questioning and reflection that
may last several days.
What form does all this take in your daily work?
A. C: All my novels have a poetic texture. The raw
material is a block of rough, shapeless clay that I
work on until I've found the formula. The first
draft is always a sketch which is virtually illegible,
except to me. Then the characters emerge from
the rough matter, and their destiny takes shape.
I don't start methodically, with a prearranged
plan. At first I let things flow along and take their
course. Then I go back to what I've written and
look very closely at the words that will have to be
cut, tightened or straightened out. I look at the
text much more critically at this stage. I search for
the right word. Craftsmanship starts after visu¬
alization of the idea: I work on the rhythm, the
music. It's a process of question-and-answ er that
goes on day after day.
