ENTERPRISE IN AFRICA
BY KIMANTHI MUTUA
Mm
and s
lega
rar from empty-handed.
Members of a women's tontine
in Cameroon, above, put their
notes on the table. They use
the tontine banking system,
based on mutual confidence
among its participants, as a
springboard into the business
world.
^pSäk
I he Kenya Rural Enterprise Pro¬
gramme (K-Rep) is one of the
largest microfinancc institutions
(MFIs) in Africa. Since it was
founded in 1984, it has made available over
50,000 loans worth $17 million and is now
financially sustainable. It is currently trans¬
forming itself into a regulated financial insti¬
tution, just as MFIs in other African countries
are doing in order to tap their financial markets
for funds, and thus minimize or eliminate
dependency on donors.
A new strategy
At first microfinance in Africa was usually
handled by institutions that ran social wel¬
fare projects, and little attention was paid to
promoting financial sustainability. The pro¬
jects did not reach large numbers of people
and were criticized for not being cost effec¬
tive. There was no clear strategy.
Next, many African MFIs looked to the
experience of other continents, notably Asia
and Latin America. There was a major change
of method, whereby training and technical
assistance were hived off from the delivery of
financial services. This "financial systems
approach" is now widely followed by MFIs in
Africa, including K-Rep.
In its early years K-Rep supported credit
p rogrammes that were tacked on to social wel¬
fare programmes, providing them with grants,
training and technical assistance. Over time it
became clear that welfare and relief institu¬
tions found it difficult to adapt to the finan¬
cial systems approach and that the mix of
credit delivery and training of entrepreneurs
was having a limited impact.
K-Rep therefore adopted a new strategy
in 1989, notably by changing the form of its
financial support from grants to loans. Finally
it started its own direct lending scheme,
Juhudi Chikola.
30
HE UNESCO COURIER JANUARY 1997

Abundant choice
When it decided to establish a bank, K-Rep
considered the question of whether or not to
continue with its other development activi¬
ties, and whether these goals could be achieved
by a bank. Its response was to go on with
these activities because it believes that micro¬
financc is not a panacea to development prob¬
lems. Microcnterprise development, for exam¬
ple, has limitations in terms of reaching the
poorest of the poor. To remain relevant to the
constituency of the poorest, it is necessary to
develop new instruments and products. A
microfinance bank can provide many of these
services, such as loans for domestic, health and
education purposes, but it cannot provide
other services such as affordable housing mort¬
gages and health insurance. K-Rep thus does
not intend to become a conventional bank
but to use the banking framework to fill an
important gap that commercial banks have
been unable or unwilling to fill.
The choices made by K-Rep take their place
within the wide diversity of approaches and



systems being developed by MFIs in Africa
today. Apart from solidarity groups and credit
unions, many rotating savings and credit asso¬
ciations (Tontines in West Africa, Chikolas
in Kenya and Stockvel in South Africa) have a
proven track record as efficient sources of
microfinancc. In Egypt the Alexandria Busi¬
nessmen's Association has created a microcre¬
dit system which takes advantage of the strict
law and cultural stigma on defaulters of
promissory notes. In West, Central and East¬
ern Africa the village banking system, com¬
munity managed credit and associations have
proved to be very effective.
New microfinancc institutions, such as The
Centennial Bank in Uganda, The Commu¬
nity Bank in South Africa, City Savings in
Ghana and The People's Bank in Nigeria are
being or already have been established as reg¬
ulated financial institutions. A number of
countries, including the Gambia and several
French-speaking West African countries, are
in the process of formulating new legislation
for MFIs. In South Africa, MFIs have taken the
initiative of establishing a self-regulating body
to oversee the conduct of its members.
This legislation is extremely important.
Apart from providing a conducive regulatory
environment for MFIs, it provides legitimacy
for a practice still considered by many to be a
short-term donor-dependent intervention.
The sector has also attracted many "gct-rich-
quick" quacks, who must not be allowed to
hijack the industry. M
4 n women's self-help group i
Soweto (South Africa).
1/ameroonian fashion
designer Joséphine Bertrano
employs 12 men in her dress¬
making workshop.
.A grain mill owned by a
women's co-operative in Mali.
Bought on credit, it was
gradually paid for with money
charged for milling.
M meeting to discuss
microfinance projects
in Kenya.
THE UNESCO ÇiURlERl JANUARY 1997 31
