North america
Mothers and daughters
BY ELKE LIEBS
I There is no such thing as the archetypal
I North American woman. She is as
many-sided as the continent itself, a vast
fusion of races and religions. All the same,
books for children and adolescents provide
an interesting overview of the expectations,
projected desires and anxieties of young peo¬
ple as they confront the older generation.
These books featuring parents and children
offer insights into what is considered socially
representative and generally acceptable or unac¬
ceptable.
However, the realism of this type of liter¬
ature is limited. It is a setting for encounters
I he cover of Lois Lowry's
Anastasia Krupnik (1979), a
story describing a strong
relationship between a little
girl and her family.
rö«"*00
between many-faceted realities, where con¬
flicts arise and solutions are sometimes found.
Above all these situations stimulate us to
think about our own identity and that of
others, about cultural differences and shared
values.
\A lust for life
^LjKI'1
These shared values might be generally defined
as "lust for happiness" or "lust for life". We
even find the theme of lust for survival in Vera
and Bill Cleaver's book, Where the Lilies
Bloom (1969). This is the story of a fourteen-
year-old girl who, after the death of her
mother and father, makes superhuman efforts
to bring up and hold together a large family,
thereby fulfilling a promise that she has made
to her dying father. The strength of character
that she deploys in the process would honour
an adult woman but it also consigns her to
great solitude.
The ideal in this book is that of the family,
whose life-giving and life-supporting func¬
tion is made abundantly clear. Led by the ener¬
getic Mary, the children collect rare medicinal
herbs which they sell to make a living. The
story ends when Mary's sister starts a family
of her own. The two girls have very different
characters and ideals. Mary is brave and has
disciplined herself to be so hard and unselfish
that childhood and youth pass her by. Her
very virtues deprive her of what she most
needs the love of others. Her sister is gen¬
tle, pretty, conciliatory and indecisive in all
matters except for her decision to marry.
The fact that the roles of the sisters are
reversed at the end of the novel raises the ques¬
tion as to whether these two images of woman
arc mutually exclusive in the author's mind.
They certainly provide a striking demonstra¬
tion of the psychologist Erich Fromm's the¬
ory that a person must first learn to love him-
or herself (and accept the love of others) before
becoming capable of loving others. The same
principle applies to the family. This story deals
with two kinds of survival physical and

AS SHE DASHED FROM THE LIBRARY A
OF EXCITEMENT SWEPT OVER HER..
WAVE
above all psychological for a girl, a young
woman, a human being and a family.
In / Would Rather Be a Turnip (1971)
another story by the same two well-known
authors of children's books, the family is seen
in a different light. After her mother's death,
twclvc-ycar-old Annie lives alone with her
father and an extremely wilful black house¬
keeper until the housekeeper's nephew, who
was born out of wedlock, moves in with them.
Annie's hatred of the intruder is expressed in
eloquent fantasies, as when she writes a "novel"
about an illegitimate child being thrown into
a dustbin. Unlike Mary, Annie is able to sub¬
limate her fantasies of violence and eventually
she saves the life of the once-hated new fam¬
ily member by shooting a bull that is threat¬
ening him. Through this symbolic act, she
liberates herself from the constricting world of
her prejudices and doubts. The little nephew,
Ln Australian poster to
promote literacy.
who is exceptionally gifted and far more
mature than she is, has long since won her
over and passed on to her his own love of
reading. She comes to understand that the
word "family" does not necessarily only
describe a blood-relationship.
Keep your cool is the rule
Awakening sexuality is another common
theme in literature for adolescents. At first it
is surprising to see how naturally twelve- to
fourteen-year-old girls use an erotic vocabulary
which still, absurdly, sometimes makes their
mothers blush. But this linguistic ease hides a
lack of real experience. In most cases, the greater
their skill with words, the greater their fear
of what lies behind them. But that fear must
on no account be admitted. Keep your cool is
the rule. So all these girls dream of the kind of
great love affair they have seen on television and
arc bitterly disappointed when they have their
own first emotional experience. What's more,
they can expect little help from their mothers.
We often come across the stereotype of parents
who arc desperately worried if their fourteen-
year-old daughter has not yet dated any boys
but are dismayed when she falls in love.
Patty Dann's book, Mermaids (1986), for
example, which has been turned into a highly
successful film, seems to me symptomatic of
this conflictual situation that many American



mothers impose on their daughters. Fourteen-
year-old Charlotte is familiar with her mother's
many relationships with men and makes ironic
comments about them. As a psychological
defence, she goes on a purity trip and decides she
wants to become a nun. Unfortunately, she is
also her mother's daughter and is constantly
falling in love. Despite her "experience", she
thinks she is pregnant after her first real kiss.
Erotic and religious fanaticism culminate in a
scene where she bares her breasts to the crucifix.
As George Bernard Shaw said about his Saint
Joan, she is "in love with religion".
Adolescents still occasionally go through
such phases today. But the situation in this
story becomes implausible when mother and
daughter both develop a crush on the same
man; when the mother's concern for her
daughter's welfare is confined to cynical com¬
ment; when she takes a malicious delight in
stealing her daughter's first love (making Char¬
lotte weep for the first time in her life); and

when she does not even want to come into
the house with the father whom her children
long to see on his only visit, an incident which
verges on disaster.
The real message of this contradictory
book remains somewhat obscure. What we are
shown is a distorted picture of emancipation,
psychological neglect and sarcasm which pre¬
vents us from experiencing clear feelings. Just
three sentences are devoted to fourteen-year-
old Charlotte's first physical experience with
a much older man.
Fortunately, families aren't always so
neglectful in adolescent literature. In Lois
-, Lowry's short story, Anastasia Krupnik
(1979), Anastasia is treated with understand¬
ing by her educated and sensitive parents (her
father is a professor and her mother an artist)
when she rebels against the arrival of her baby
brother, whom she hates. Arguments between
the parents are worked out with humour and
mutual respect, even in the presence of their
ten-year-old daughter.
In one particularly moving scene, the daugh¬
ter questions her mother in great detail about her
first experience of love. This conversation is
coloured with a striking mixture of timidity
and frankness. Love, pain, disappointment,
death, weakness and strength are discussed in
simple language that even a little girl can under¬
stand. This story makes a pleasant contrast with
many others in which children and adolescents
are ignored when they ask questions and arc
told that they should know the answers to all
their problems by the time they are fourteen.
Down-and-out in Boston
Poverty is another subject which increasingly
appears in adolescent literature. In Lois
Lowry's Taking Care of Terrific (1983) the
heroine and her girlfriends decide to bring a lit¬
tle happiness into the lives of a group of poor
old women by taking them boating in one of
Boston's parks.
In other stories the protagonists are them¬
selves confronted with poverty. In Norma
Fox Mazer's novel Silver (1988), a fourteen-
year-old girl lives in a mobile home with her
mother, who works as a cleaner and has a
younger boyfriend. The general atmosphere
is one of mutual understanding and frank¬
ness. Then the daughter starts working secretly
as a house-cleaner to help her mother make
9 THE UNESCO COURIER« |ULY-AUCUST 1007
I he young heroine of Silver
(1988), a novel by Norma Fox
Mazer, discovers the value of
friendship and trust.
ends meet. She gets to know other girls and
finds out that life always holds problems,
sometimes big ones. One of the girls is forced
to endure sexual abuse in her rich uncle's house.
Her moral shame contrasts sharply with the
modest pride of the mobile home dwellers.
Here romanticism mingles with blunt social
criticism in a way that is neither Utopian nor
convincingly realistic. Yet the story docs cap¬
ture a slice of life that faithfully reflects what
is happening in America today.
Another theme is the experience of Jewish
immigrants in the United States, as it was
shaped partly by poverty and the ghetto and
partly by the events of the Second World War.
Judie Angell's book One Way to Ansonia
(1985), which opens in 1899, contains a nuraj
ber of fascinating portaits of women of dif¬
ferent ages. They have a hard time adapting to
their new culture and face problems that arc
due to the weight of their own culture's patri¬
archal traditions and customs. Once again, the
women demonstrate remarkable resourceful¬
ness. The main character displays boundless
energy in her battle to acquire education and
assert her identity. With her child in tow, she


leaves her family, returning later as an indepen¬
dent woman who is now capable of experienc¬
ing happiness.
Getting their man
After reading a number of books for young
people it is surprising to sec how many girls
and women believe that they must attract a
boy or a man, not from a position of inde¬
pendence and emancipation, but in order to
catch him and get him under their thumb.
The reader may well be surprised by the
extent to which these women depend on accep¬
tance by men. To keep the man they love, they
are apparently prepared to put up with arro¬
gance, rudeness and boredom, as well as being
lectured to and told how to behave. Hilda Col-
man's Notfor Love (1983) dishes up all the tired
stereotypes of American girlhood: a pseudo-
harmonious parental marriage based on indif¬
ference; interest in clothes, parties, sports and
boys, and anxiety at the emptiness of vacations.
It takes the political commitment of a man
friend extremely handsome of course to lead
the main character, Jill, in a different direction
and to remain true to her new ideals even when
her mentor seems to let her down.
Another book, Dear Lovey Hart, I am
Desperate (1 975), is more subtle. In her capac¬
ity as the university newspaper's "Miss Lonely
Hearts", a female student gradually comes to
understand the differences between superfi¬
cial and deeper feelings, conflicts and solu¬
tions. In the process she learns about herself
and her own contradictions.
The mothers portrayed in these two books
are another striking example of the clear-cut



contrasts that still typify the image of the aver-
rage woman. They are either helpless and resigned
or thoroughly self-assured, hard-working and
co-operative. They show respect and under¬
standing (or indifference) to their grown-up
daughters. When it comes to love affairs, the
daughters hardly ever turn to their mothers, as
if they fear incomprehension or rivalry.
But for the most part these women of all
ages are imaginative, energetic and determined
to make sense of their lives. In the final analy¬
sis, all the stories discussed here convey a sim¬
ple message: never give up the search.
" D ooks for children and
adolescents give a good idea
of what young people think
about their elders."
