THIS MONTH'S INTERVIEW
René Depestre
Between utopia
and reality
Your life as an adult and as a poet began with
what you later called "a triple badge of rebellion"
proud négritude, impassioned surrealism, and the
idea of revolution. Today only the surrealism part
seems to have survived.
R.D.: It's a long story. When André Breton came
to Haiti at the end of 1945, his visit coincided
with an exhibition of the Cuban painter Wifredo
Lam's paintings and a series of lectures given by
the Martinique poet Aimé Césaire. This really
fired the imagination of us young Haitian artists
and writers. At that time we knew nothing about
what was happening in the surrealist movement
in France. For young people combatting Presi¬
dent Elie Lescot's dreadful dictatorship, surre¬
alism was the lifeblood of revolt. Contact with
Breton had a contagious effect on us. After his
first lecture in a Port-au-Prince cinema, we
brought out a special issue of our new magazine
La Ruche as a tribute to him. We went to prison
for our pains and the magazine was banned.
What Breton discovered in Haiti, and made
us discover too, was that surrealism wasn't just
an aesthetic doctrine but something that could
be part of a people's way of looking at the world;
that there was a kind of grassroots surrealism.
This restored our self-confidence. Wc saw that
this sense of wonder we had secretly been a bit
ashamed of and associated with a kind of under¬
development was actually our weapon. Breton
told us that in France "we launched surrealism
as a movement based on intellectual foundations,
you in Haiti learned all about it in the cradle."
In other words, surrealism was something inher¬
ent in the Caribbean. Voodoo, a product of
Franco-African syncretism, is an example of reli-
A Fran co-Haiti an poet,
essayist and award-
winning novelist looks
back on his nomadic life,
speaks out against
totalitarian ideologies
and reaffirms his
attachment to public
spiritedness based on
planet-wide solidarity
and mutual respect.
Interview by
JasminaSopova
gious surrealism. The behaviour of the voodoo
gods is supremely surrealist.
H So surrealism for you is much more than a
literary movement.
K.D.: Much more. Many European writers, start¬
ing with the German Romantics and even before
that, had a surrealist approach. I'm sure if you
looked closely at Egyptian, Japanese or Chinese
culture, you'd find surrealist elements there too.
For ine, surrealism is a way of injecting the super¬
natural into everyday life. You find it e\ crywhere.
But some people, like Haitians or Brazilians,
display it more boldly than others.
How do you explain the emergence of the
Duvaliers in a society imbued with a sense of the
magical?
R.D.: The magical has even marked Haitian pol¬
itics. Our history has thrown up dictators who
practised a kind of tragic perversion of magic.
This is how the "tonton macoute" which is a
folk concept, an incarnation of evil, a kind of
Nazi, a Haitian SS-man came to exist. Haitian
folklore is a tug-of-war between good and evil.
The elder Duvalier, "Papa Doc," used the forces
of black magic to plunge the country into a total¬
itarian surrealism.
But there's more to it than this demoniacal
aspect. From the December morning in 1492
when Christopher Columbus discovered Haiti
and was transfixed by what he saw, the historic,
baroque tale of Haiti cannot be separated from
American wondrous realism. A sense of the won¬
drous (South American magic realism) has
become part and parcel of Haitians' view of the
world and the sustenance of their third of the

island of Ilispaniola, where the best and the
worst rub shoulders like the dearest of friends,
when they are not locked in terrible combat.
You have celebrated the communist utopia in
your poems.
R.D.: The Marxist utopia, with all its lies and
repressive nightmares, took over my work and
my life as a poet until the moment I broke with
Stalinism. After living in places which had a huge
"strategic" importance in the turmoil of our cen¬
tury Moscow, Prague, Beijing, Hanoi and
Havana I realized that what was meant by
"socialist revolution" in those places was not the
opposite of the Haitian terror regime, but
another form of the same perversion. Instead of
promoting the heritage of the rights of man and
the citizen, "the revolution" defiled the auton¬
omy of women and men and carried out, at their
expense, the most amazing hijack of ideals and
dreams in all human history.
What has become of the "revolutionary ideal"
which drew you from Haiti to Europe and then on to
Cuba?
R.D.: I ardently believed in revolution. For me it
became a kind of natural state, like breathing,
walking or swimming. And it nearly destroyed
my integrity as a citizen and a writer. The ideal
of revolution seriously impoverished my personal
store of poetry and tenderness which, when I
was twenty, made me think of my future work as
a state of wonder and oneness with the world. It
made my literary career that of a writer who
performed psychological and intellectual som¬
ersaults and sudden existential about-turns a
kind of carnival of uncertainties and inconsis¬
tencies, adrift in the furious currents of the cen¬
tury's passions and ideals. The treasure islands
invented by the utopias and mythologies of rev¬
olution went up in smoke with the great dreams
of our youthuniting the idea of transforming
the world (Karl Marx) with that of changing life
(Arthur Rimbaud).
The word "utopia" as used by Marxists has a
pejorative meaning for you. But doesn't the world
need utopias?
R.D.: Octavio Paz has defined utopias as "the
dreams of reason." We're just emerging from a
terrible nightmare of reason. The nineteenth
century, a critical age if ever there was one, gave
birth to the idea of a revolutionary utopia. But
the totally legitimate dream of earlier philoso¬
phers did not turn into the major transformation
of human lives they had hoped for, nor into
unprecedented progress for humankind. The
generous aspirations of critical thought imposed
on us, under the bogus label of "real socialism,"
48
In place of the notion
of realpolitik, which is
at the root of most of
the woes of people
and societiesand
which still flourishes
to an extraordinary
degree in
governmentI offer
the notion of
realutopia.
an absolutism the like of which we had never
seen before.
In saying this I do not wish to denigrate the
idea of utopia as such. Old age reminds me these
days that I don't have much time left and that I
must hasten to express things I've kept to myself
all my life. And hopefully express them with
grace and maturity. So, in a way, I'm summing up
my life's nomadic journey. And all self-criticism
leads one to utopia. But hardened observer that
I am, I deeply distrust a historical concept that
this century's revolutions have debased. In place
of the notion of realpolitik, which is at the root
of most of the woes of people and societies and
which still flourishes to an extraordinary degree
in government, I offer the notion »[realutopia.
Could you explain what you mean by realutopia":
R.D.: It's an aesthetic concept which enables
me to unite the various parts of my Franco-Hait¬
ian creole-ness as a writer. Doctors and physiol¬
ogists call synergy the links between several ele¬
ments which combine in a single function and a
common effect. The idea oí realutopia leads me
to a kind of aesthetic and literary synergy which
points in a single direction the multitude of expe¬
riences that I owe to magical reality, to négri¬
tude, to sun-kissed eroticism and to the creóle
fantasizing of Haitians, which is the surrealism
of the humbled and the hurt.
So you haven't entirely turned your back on
négritude?
R.D.: I've always mistrusted the idea of négritude
because I did not think it was possible to con¬
stitute an anthropology which is the exact oppo¬
site of the one which devalued us and down¬
graded us as "Blacks". You can't just transfer to
a Black context what is said and done in terms of
Whites. Aimé Césaire referred to this phenom¬
enon as turning Gobineau upside down. I realized
we had to create our own aesthetic and ideol¬
ogy without falling into "anti-racist racism."
That's why I said goodbye to négritude at the
same time as I dropped Marxism. I've only stuck
with surrealism, which is still one of my working
tools. I use both ends of the tool the scholarly
and the popular. But I mistrust surrealism too.
Breton leaned towards the occult, trying to link
surrealism with certain cabbalistic and Talmudic
traditions a shadowy area in the history of
thought but no less interesting for that which
are the equivalent of looking for the philoso¬
pher's stone. I don't go along with that at all.
I've rejected the ideals of my youth and today
I work with the tragic experiences which in my
case they led to.

How do you see the world these days?
R.D.: The idea of revolution has been buried
and history marches on, with its media-fed pro¬
cession of horrors and marvels. The myth of a
great consummation of the body and the mind
died of natural causes in a big So\iet-stylc bed.
The corpse is still warm and already the spark of
totalitarianism has reappeared in the shape of
religious fundamentalism. All kinds of ethno-
nationalist savagery, supposedly under the ban¬
ner of a campaign to renew faithless societies, are
building monuments to obscurantism, terrorism
and new banditry by the state. On the borders of
the West, the idea of a fundamentalist utopia has
taken the place of a revolutionary one.
How can literature inspire people to embark on
the adventure of a new renaissance?
R.D.: The answer to that is shaped by a context
of fundamentalist horrors, intcr-eth nie massacres
and racist and nationalist violence. It's one of a
planet completely ruled by market forces.
Thanks to the rational instruments of the
rule of law and democracy, the institution of the
market has survived all attacks on it. But most
people now think the democracy of the mar¬
ket its basis and the way it works needs to
be overhauled. Or else life in society is going to
become a great planet-wide casino. So it's in the
interests of the victorious marketplace to do
something about the chaotic and aggressive con¬
ditions in which the globalization of human
affairs is taking place.
Bold steps should be taken to make good use
of the world's heritage of democratic experi-
I see the bold
imagination of poets
and writers at the
forefront of the values
shared by the world's
cultures.
ence, the rich store of rules of citizenship and the
art of living together which is to be found in
Western civil societies, the most developed and
experienced in terms of law, liberties, justice
and solidarity. We should be able to turn the
current haphazard process of globalization into
an unprecedented Immunization of relations
between indh ¡duals and nation-states. The inter¬
national ci\il society which is growing up amid
disorder and uncertainty needs the oxygen of
world-wide public-spiritedness and the idea of
solidarity that will be conducive to fair distrib¬
ution of the values and principles which are now
the shared property of the global village.
Who could promote this global public-
spiritedness?
R.D.: I see the bold imagination of poets and writ¬
ers at the forefront of the values shared by the
world's cultures. Our works, each with its own
strictly aesthetic identity, should help scientists
and politicians to revamp our old ideas about good
and evil, to revive a sense of the sacred which is
being lost and to devise a more balanced rela¬
tionship between North and South, and East and
West. This would be in a new world order where
the necessary rules of commerce, tempered by a
new sense of meaning and new ideals, could express
a fresh balance between nature and history. To
advance further without risking disaster, the spirit
of the market should now be endowed with cer¬
tain ethical features, such as meaning, laws of
citizenship and an art of living together based on
mutual respect and sympathy between the world's
peoples and societies.
