VANCOUVER
or the spirit ofplace
BY HADANI DITMARS
M mask by Bob Dempsey
inspired by Native American
tradition. It depicts a human
face with a raven and a frog.
Vancouver, pretty little Pacific town
of my youth. Cedar trees and blue
water. Snow-capped mountains and
Indian legends. I returned to you
after years away and found a city transformed.
Whole neighbourhoods had changed lan¬
guages from English to Chinese, Punjabi
and Spanish. Street signs spoke Cantonese and
all the taxi drivers were refugees. Vancouver
had made that grand voyage from small town
to big city, and even more dramatically, it had
leapt into the realm of displacement. It had
become a town full of people who were fro m
somewhere else.
Canada is known for its multiculturalism,
but Vancouver, which is separated from the
rest of the country by the Rocky Mountains
and spiritually connected to Asia by the Pacific
Ocean, is unique even within the Canadian
experience.
Only one hundred years old, Vancouver
was built on the bones of ancient native cul¬
tures by mainly British Europeans and inden¬
tured Chinese and Japanese labour.
Native Indian children were routinely taken
from their parents and put into "residential
schools" where their culture, language and tra¬
ditions were replaced by white English, Chris¬
tian values.
Since the introduction of Canadian Prime
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau 's policy of mul-
M bentwood box with a mask
inside by Ken Mowatt, a
contemporary Canadian
artist.
OéC THE UNESCO lOURIERl MARCH 1997

ticulturalism, Canadians have been encouraged
to forget the past and embrace each others' dif¬
ferences. But the road to harmonious cultural
pluralism has not been easy. Japanese Canadian
groups have sought and in many places gained
acknowledgement for their unjust internment
during the Second World War as enemy aliens,
but compensation for the full extent of their
emotional and financial suffering has not been
forthcoming.
Native groups have been engaged in a series
of on-going and controversial land claims, and
English-Canadians have had to adjust to the
cultural changes brought by the influx of
Hong Kong immigrants.
But Vancouver's unique position in the
Canadian cultural context, its dramatic geog¬
raphy and indeed its very newness, create a
special atmosphere, where cultural métissage is
not only possible but inevitable. For in a city
less than a century old, tradition is something
that must be created rather than referred to.
I The beauty ofemptiness
As a student, I always complained that Van¬
couver lacked culture and dreamed of escape to
Paris or Rome older cities with richer tra¬



ditions. Now, coming back to the city of my
birth after years in many "older" places, I real¬
ize that the very newness of Vancouver is its
richness. Its emptiness is its beauty. Without
the cultural baggage both good and bad
of more established cities, Vancouver becomes
I he inner port of Vancouver,
Canada's third largest city.
a place where anything is possible, a place where
the new cultures arriving here can easily take
root.
Vancouver is not a "melting pot" like the
American multicultural model, where inte¬
gration usually means assimilation. It is a place
where cultures can continue to flourish and
grow, often keeping their language and tradi¬
tions, transplanting them into new soil. The
end result is a kind of cross pollination where
cultures rub against each other in new and cre¬
ative ways.
Evidence of this is found in Vancouver's
many ethnically distinct neighbourhoods,
districts that have their own colour and
flavour, but manage to transcend "ghettoiza-
tion" through cross-cultural connection.
s There is Vancouver's "Chinatown", for
5 instance one of the largest in North Amer-
| ica where the street signs are bilingual (Chi-
| nese/English). Although most residents are ori-
| ental, there is a growing link with the non-Asian
| community, just as Chinese speaking Vancou-
I vérités are making inroads into traditionally
n totem pole
in Stanley Park.
THE UNESCO lOURrERB MARCH 1997 ¿3


Anglo-Canadian enclaves (especially in the busi¬
ness sector). A small but significant Anglo-
Canadian community of artists, inspired by
the sounds and colours of the lively market¬
place, chooses to live and work there. In addi¬
tion, in a city whose culinary palate is becom¬
ing more and more Asian (most Vancouverites
feel comfortable using chopsticks, and have dim
sum and sushi'm their nutritional vernacular), an
increasing number of non-Chinese Vancou¬
verites go to Chinatown to shop for food.
And as alternative medicine currently
enjoys great popularity in Vancouver, many
non-Asians go to Chinatown to consult Chi¬
nese herbal doctors or acupuncturists. Some
non-Chinese Vancouverites are even adopting
Chinese geomancy orfeng shui the ancient
Taoist art of designing houses and interiors
so that energy and harmony emanate and "bad
spirits" are not "trapped" in "blocked" or
poorly designed spaces, and come to China¬
town to consult withfeng shui masters.
Others come to Chinatown to sit and con¬
template in the Sun-Yat-Sen classical Chinese IVI usicians of different ethnic
origins form the Vancouver-
based "Asza" group.
gardens, where blue herons perch near bamboo
plants and pools of goldfish. (The only other
public garden in Vancouver that matches this
one in serenity is perhaps the Nitobe memo¬


rial Japanese Garden, which stays true to the
Shinto spirit thousands of miles from Kyoto,
while springing effortlessly out of West Coast
forest that is eerily Japanese).
The gateway to Asia
While Vancouver is becoming known as the
"gateway to Asia" and 25 per cent of our pop¬
ulation are Chinese speaking, this is only part
of the cross-cultural picture.
The Commercial Drive area, on the East
side of the city, is another example of an inte¬
grated ethnic neighbourhood. Originally a
very Italian area, Commercial Drive has now
become the great boulevard of multicultural
café society. Bohemian Anglo-Canadians, new
Portuguese and South American immigrants
as well as the original Italian community, all sit
together at the numerous terrazzo cafes, sip¬
ping caffe latte. Commercial Drive has become
the place for displaced Mediterraneans of all
nationalities, as local clubs feature nights of
Spanish flamenco music and Portuguese/ac/o
attended enthusiastically by both southern
Europeans and WASPs with gypsy hearts.
A stroll through the area around 49th and
Main Street, popularly known as Indiatown,
is a fantastic voyage in itself. It's like finding a
Delhi market magically transported to the
West Coast. I remember shopping there one
day in the midst of a small blizzard, with two
feet of snow piled up on the sidewalks. The
full fury of a Canadian winter could not stop
the sari merchants from selling silk, or keep the
sweetshop owner from his brisk trade in
coconut délectables. The streets were full of
women in colourful scarves and pantaloons
wearing snowboots, and young, turbanned
men dressed in the latest urban chic leather
jackets and mobile phones off to the CD
shop to buy the latest hhangra (Indian pop
music) tunes. After a few blocks, the faces
became paler, the music duller, the aromas less
intense, and I looked back at Indiatown like a
small urban jewel, glittering in the distance.
Similarly transporting is a walk down West
Broadway in the "Greek area". Within a five-
block radius, there are scores of Greek restau¬
rants, cafes and night-clubs. A special base¬
ment taverna known simply as "The Greek
Club" offers after hours bouzouki music,
great ouzo and wild folk dancing, as well as
heart-felt ballads of lost love belted out by a
beautiful, dark-eyed singer. It's enough to
make you homesick for Athens, until, bleary-
eyed from the late night and the Greek ciga-

to raise funds for refugee relief a simple,
compassionate gesture that might not have
been possible in another cultural and geo¬
graphical context.
Spiritually, too, Vancouver offers a wealth
of cross-cultural experience. It is a city where
you can find Christians who go on native
"visionqucsts", Jews who have become whirling
dervishes, and Scandinavian Lutherans who
have transformed into Tibetan Buddhists.
I know of an Iranian Sufi teacher who leads
weekly discussions of Persian esoteric poetry
I from his East Vancouver apartment. He reads
| and analyses excerpts from Saadi, Hafez and
I Rumi for a group of faithful students from all
Î corners of the globe. Among them are Jews,
| Muslims and Christians, Asians and Anglo-
I Canadians all Vancouverites. The sense of
-
mmJBt'l II 18-
lop, an Italian restaurant on
Water Street.
Mbove, left to right: Fruit and
vegetable stalls in Vancouver's
Chinatown. A street near the
waterfront. Street scene in the
city centre.
rette smoke, you emerge from below only to
find some unmistakable sign of North Amer¬
ica a McDonalds restaurant or a Seven-Eleven
chain-store.
And while Vancouver's colonial history is
not unblemished, different cultures do co¬
exist here in relative peace and harmony. Indeed,
more and more immigrants are attracted to
Vancouver precisely because it is, relatively
speaking, a sanctuary.
Not long ago, a group of gypsies arrived
here from central Europe, fleeing the recent
increase in violence and persecution from skin¬
heads and neo-nazis. They were helped by a
group of local gypsies and other supporters to
find housing and winter clothes. Some of the
gypsies who were musicians were able to find
work at a café where a multicultural group (an
Indian guitarist, a Rom gypsy dancer from
England, and a French Basque singer) perform
flamenco music every week. To them, Van¬
couver is paradise. It is a place where they can
have a chance to live normal, healthy lives, rel¬
atively free from racism.
During the violent shelling in South
Lebanon in the spring of 1996, a local group
of humanitarian Jews and Arabs joined forces
displacement somehow complements the Sufi
message that we are all spiritual exiles in the
material world, as well as the idea that unity is
achieved through transcending opposites.
I also know a Cree healer who runs weekly
native "healing circles" where people from all
kinds of backgrounds participate. When I first
attended one such "circle", where participants
sing, chant and drum native prayers while
passing an eagle feather around, I found a truly
international group. Among them were a Pol¬
ish secretary, an African teacher, a Swiss natu¬
ralist and a French artist. The Cree Shaman
told us that we were all connected by a com¬



mon experience of the spirit of the land.
It was a spiritual homecoming for me to
realize that, although my ancestors came fro m
many different lands from Lebanon, from
Denmark, France, England and Ireland they
and I were bonded by, as D. H. Lawrence put
it, the spirit of place.
Vancouver's green forests, blue waters and
majestic mountains are a common heritage for
us all to share. As the American Indians say, no
one "owns" the land because it "belongs" to
everyone. As long as everyone in turn belongs
a little to the land.
r 35
THE UNESCO ÍOURIER MARCH 1997 ^
