Poverty is usually thought of as a lack of income The CPM considers the lack of three basic
because it is income that is largely assumed to capabilities. The first is the capability to be well
determine a person's material standard of well- nourished and healthy represented by the pro-
being. Thus, if $1 a day is taken as the poverty line, portion of children under five who are mder-
33% of the developing world's population, or 1.3 weight. The second is the capability for healthy
billion people, are poor. Nearly half of them reproduction proxied by the proportion of
more than 550 million live in South Asia, 215 births unattended by trained health personnel,
million in sub-Saharan Africa and 150 million The third is the capability to be educated and
in Latin America. knowledgeable represented by female illiter-
But "income poverty" is only part of the pic- acy. The index is noteworthy for its emphasis on
ture. Just as human development encompasses the deprivation of women, which is severe in
aspects of life much broader than income, so some countries. It is now well known that depri-
poverty should be seen as having many dimen- vation of women adversely affects the human
sions. development of families and society.
A new, multidimensional measure of human According to national income poverty lines,
deprivation, the capability poverty measure 21% of the people in developing countries live
(CPM), was introduced in the United Nations below the poverty line. The corresponding figure
Development Programme's Human Develop¬
ment Report 1996. Intended to complement
income measures of poverty, it focuses on human
capabilities, as UNDP's human development
index1 does. But rather than examining the aver¬
age state of people's capabilities, it reflects the per¬
centage of people who lack basic, or minimally
essential, human capabilities.
for capability poverty is 37% . In other words, 900
million people in developing countries are income
poor, but 1 .6 billion people are capability poor.
1 Since 1990 the Human Development Report has
presented the human development index to capture as
many aspects of human development as possible in one
simple composite index and to produce a ranking of
human development achievements.
