commentary
I
Federico Mayor
Science education and
sustainable development
The eve of a new millennium is an appropriate moment for
UNESCO and other international organizations to reflect on
their missions and the challenges that lie ahead.
Education for all remains the foundation for the achieve¬
ment of sustainable human development. Basic education will
continue to be an absolute priority, as it forms the essential first
step towards further learning and plays a critical role in the
shaping of values and the development of other necessary life
skills. For this reason we must ensure that we enter the next mil¬
lennium equipped and determined to "reach the unreached"
the world's 850 million adult illiterates and the over 200 million
children still deprived of the right to education.
Education means mastering one's own destiny; it means
personal sovereignty. It is the key to a genuine participatory
democracy, which is closely related to development and peace.
It is not just about knowledge; it is also about learning to do,
learning to be and above all learning to live together. Educa¬
tion and teachers have an ethical function that must never be for¬
gotten. In this connection, I should like to insist that while a
market economy may be acceptable, a market society most cer¬
tainly is not. What matters is not whether the market is free, but
whether/?eo/>/e are free.
A continuing process
Education can no longer be regarded as a one-chance affair. It
must be seen as a continuing process whereby people are offered
learning opportunities at a number of times throughout their
lives. This "lifelong" and "life-wide" education for all demands
the diversification and expansion of structures, and a better
linkage between general and vocational education. It also implies
the development of alternative educational opportunities and
delivery systems, both formal and informal.
The role and functions of higher education systems and
institutions need to be re-examined in the light of the pro¬
found transformations occurring in society today. Too often,
the model of higher education we sec in both the developing and
industrialized countries involves an acceptance of old, inap-
r1* THCUNESCO l^OURIERB NOVEMBER 199/
propriate models that have remained largely impermeable to
economic, cultural and social needs. We need also to reflect on
Article 26.1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which says that "higher education shall be equally accessible
to all on the basis of merit". Yes, merit and merit alone must
be the criterion; and once this criterion is satisfied, there should
be no limits of means, age or sex to access. Higher education
must be universally available throughout life to all those who
can benefit from it.
Secondary education must be treated as a level in its own
right, not simply a means to placing students at the door of the
university. Some of the most crucial needs in the educational sys¬
tem as a whole involve summoning individuals of all ages to such
modestly paid but highly important work as primary and sec¬
ondary school teaching. Secondary education must be recognized
as pivotal to any education system.
A new strategy for science education
Science education is a key component of all education systems.
The unprecedented growth in scientific knowledge and the dra¬
matically increased complexity of this knowledge, together
with an ever-increasing demand for high quality, constitute a
challenge for science educators at all levels. How to introduce sci¬
ence and its breathtaking advances into limited curricula frame¬
works, what should be the correct balance between education
in the basic sciences and the environment, and the intercon¬
nection of science education with education in technology
these are just some of the questions for which answers need to
be found. Science education can, of course, only be satisfac¬
tory if account is taken of the cultural background and ethical
implications of scientific progress.
The universities bear the great intellectual responsibility of
identifying new strategies to promote science education and
science teacher training, as well as setting and maintaining high
professional standards in education for scientific research. Intro¬
ducing new information technologies in science education,
updating basic and specialized university courses, as well as

modernizing university laboratories remain a pressing need
and a challenge for inter-university co-operation at the national,
regional and international levels.



Action needs to be taken to build university science educa¬
tion in the developing and least developed countries. I am con¬
fident that the world scientific community would gladly com¬
mit itself to such action. UNESCO will spare no efforts in
developing North-South co-operation via inter-university net¬
worksas in the UNITWIN and Unesco Chairs programme.
I believe that UNESCO and the Third World Academy of Sciences
are natural partners in such an endeavour.
Science today is at a turning point. All countries are having
to face important decisions in this field. The richer nations are
being required to rethink their science and technology priori¬
ties in the face of economic constraints and new political and eth¬
ical challenges, whilst developing countries are striving to build
up the critical capacity necessary for effective science teaching and
research leading to sustainable development.
If science alone is not capable of responding to people's aspi¬
rations for a better life, it has shown itself to be one of the major
driving forces behind development. And yet this fact and its
implications are still underestimated by decision-makers and
politicians seeking short-term success and benefits. Short-ter-
mism in policy-making naturally involves dangers for the basic
sciences. I believe that a healthy, productive scientific community
is dependent upon the pursuit of basic research. We must ensure
that the basic sciences are pursued by all nations, and that the com¬
mon stock of fundamental knowledge is shared by all.
Haves and have-nots
Another feature of the sciences today is the continuing asym¬
metry in the distribution of scientific research capacity world¬
wide. The developing countries are responsible for a mere 10 per
cent of research and development, whilst the member coun¬
tries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) can claim 85 per cent. The world is still
divided between the haves and the have-nots.
Each country's capacity to move towards sustainable human
development depends on the existence of a critical mass of
skilled human resources in the many scientific, technical and pro¬
fessional fields needed for addressing complex environment,
resources and development issues. Training of the right kind and
number of scientists, experts, technicians and educational per¬
sonnel is urgently needed. Unesco has highlighted a number
of key problems within the context of the vicious circle of low
human and capital investment/low productive returns in which
so many developing countries are locked.
The first of these problems concerns the lack of "critical
mass" at national level. Despite considerable efforts, many
developing countries do not yet have sufficient trained per¬
sonnel for sustainable development of their natural resources
and suffer from a shortage of training facilities, especially for
preparing teams of specialists to conduct studies and research
useful for decision-making. The second problem is that estab¬
lished institutions and programmes may be of limited rele
vance to local conditions, with the result that many trainees in
the developing world receive an education that has little bear¬
ing on their countries' social and economic needs. A third prob¬
lem is lack of continuity. Students who return home with
skills inappropriate to their countries' needs often end up aban¬
doning their professional fields for other pursuits, such as
business or government.
Another challenge for developing and industrialized coun¬
tries alike is that nature does not respect the frontiers of scien¬
tific disciplines. Interdisciplinarity is required to study nat¬
ural phenomena in all their complexity. And yet most current
training programmes are sectoral or disciplinary and do not
address the complex interactions between people, resources,
environment and development.
All UNESCO's intergovernmental scientific programmes
dealing with freshwater, oceanography, coastal and marine sci¬
ences, the earth sciences, and particularly land resources include
a major component on training precisely oriented in this direc¬
tion. The goal of the recently launched UNESCO-Cousteau
ecotcchnology programme is to identify, promote, and mul¬
tiply transdisciplinary university efforts through financial
assistance and networking and through the establishment of
UNESCO-Cousteau Ecotcchnology Chairs. Here, one of the
basic tasks is to ensure that in villages and municipalities there
are people with the knowledge and motivation to prescribe
and perform all the "ccojobs" that are vital to the safeguarding
of our environment.
Water and food security
Access to water is considered a basic human right, but is there
and will there be enough water to go round in future? Can
water be considered a free commodity which is available in
unlimited quantities? The answer has to be no. Clearly, fresh
water is although renewable a very limited and vulnerable
resource. In my view water is going to be one of the major
issues of the twenty-first century. Wc need to practise greater
sharing of knowledge and resources in this field. My dream is
to see the channelling of water from places where it is plentiful
to others where it is scarce, together with the promotion
through education of new attitudes to water, awareness of how
precious a shared commodity it is.
The issue of food security will be ever-present in the first
decades of the new century. The application of sound scien¬
tific knowledge will be an important factor in attaining sus¬
tainable food production, based on enhanced agricultural pro¬
ductivity, the conservation and management of natural
resources, the protection of the environment, and the stabi¬
lization of world population. But once again the solution will
be ethical the greater sharing of knowledge and resources.
We must work together at the international and national lev¬
els to achieve a consensus among governments, the scientific
community and the public at large on the importance and the role
of science for the development of societies and the well-being of
humankind. Only in this way can a solid foundation be laid for
sustainable and equitable human development.
