THE SPIRIT OF DIVERSITY
^ ^^^^% rossroads cities" took shape
M down the ages as a result of
^L » population movements and
^^taiB^ voluntary or enforced migra¬
tions that brought together a wide spectrum
of cultures and ethnic groups. Located in the
heart of economically strategic regions, these
composite cities have drawn sustenance fro m
multifarious contributions made by those
who have settled in them. Their societies pos¬
sess a creative dynamism which is the main¬
spring of their constantly renewed diversity.
But successful handling of the difficulties
inherent in these plural societies with their
multitude of ethnic groups, languages and
religions means facing up to the problems
of adversity, exclusion, ghettoization and rejec¬
tion. Crossroads cities harbour striking con¬
trasts and fierce conflicts sometimes erupt
within them.
Religious, national and ethnic minorities,
of varying numbers and degrees of influence,
provide the pluralistic flavour of crossroads
cities. The place they occupy in the city is often
reflected in its spatial organization. To live in
one of the ghetto areas into which minorities
are shunted is generally a sign of discrimina¬
is THE UNESCO f^UR'^' M\RCH 1997
BY ANISSA
BARRAK
lop, a street festival
on Ninth Avenue in Manhattan
(New York). The stalls offer
ethnic gastronomic
specialities.
tion, of legal inequality or social and economic
marginalization. When minorities are more
evenly spread throughout a city it is often the
sign of a more tolerant and egalitarian regime.
Cities and towns that have managed to
develop and prosper in a spirit of cultural and
human diversity have done so by officially
protecting minorities. This kind of protec¬
tion is the guarantee of peaceful cohabitation,
even if cohabitation is not always synony¬
mous with fair and equal treatment, still less
with cordial relations between the different
communities. In one city ethnic and cultural
intermixture succeeds because it is an accepted
practice; in another, communities arc sepa¬
rated; elsewhere, fidelity to specific traditions
goes hand in hand with allegiance to a nation.
Some regard ethnic and cultural intermin¬
gling as a source of cultural impoverishment
through a fusion that leads to uniformity and
levelling down; others see it is a source of
mutual enrichment, the fruit of mutual
exchange. But this dilemma reveals the paradox
that is at the heart of all crossroads cities: is the
pursuit of cultural intermixture as an ideal in
plural cities anathema to their very pluralism?
