LISTENING ,,/x... ah
REDISCOVERING LILI BOULANGER
BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE
A brilliantly
precocious French
composer who dazzled
the world of European
music at the beginning
of the 20th century.
r'The works of Lili Boulanger,"
the composer and conductor Igor
l Markevitch has written, "impress
me with their solitude. They are indifferent
to fashion and seem oblivious ofwhat is writ¬
ten about them. I think that this is why
they endure, and it may even explain the
strange delay before their true worth was
recognized."
This long "delay" is seemingly not yet
over. Yet Lili Boulanger, who died at the
age of twenty-four, left us music that is both
expressive and luminous, moving and
enchanting. She revealed her genius and ful¬
filled her vocation with an urgency that was
sharpened by the imminence of death.
"Lili" (Juliette Marie Olga) Boulanger
was born in Paris on 21 August 1893 of a
Russian mother and a French father. The
family had a musical tradition going back
several generations. Lili's mother was an opera
singer and her father, a composer (especially
of comic opera) and teacher of voice at the
Paris Conservatory, had won the Grand Prix
de Rome for composition for his cantata
Achille. Her sister Nadia six years her
senior was one of the twentieth century's
most influential teachers of composition, and
trained many singers, instrumentalists and
composers, includingAaron Copland, Virgil
Thomson, Astor Piazzolla, Quincy Jones and
the trumpeter Donald Byrd.
Lili showed her exceptional musical gifts
at a very early age. When she was six she
sang songs by Fauré, who accompanied her
on the piano. Despite indifferent health,
she learned to play the organ and began
composing at twelve when she wrote Valse
en mi majeur (Waltz in E Major) and La let¬
tre de mort (The Letter of Death) in 1905.
She was attracted to sacred music, and
impressed her family and friends by her
contemplative nature, maturity and spiri¬
tuality. "It is a finished monument," wrote
French composer Henri Barraud of her
work, "firmly established in its fullness, its
sobre style and a classicism which owes noth¬
ing to schooling and everything to natural
balance, a blend of knowledge and ability.
There is no trace of weakness in her think¬
ing or inexperience in her composition, no
youthful squandering of resources or vital¬
ity, no blaze of ill-contained passion if pas¬
sion there be, it has lost all carnality and
become a radiant beam of light."
Nadia, who was herself an organist and
had been a pupil of Fauré, taught Lili har¬
mony and counterpoint. Lili also received
advice from Roger Ducasse, a family friend
and another of Fame's pupils. She studied
the piano with Raoul Pugno, a cultivated
neighbour of the Boulangers' at Hanneu-
court-Gargenville in the greater Paris region
where she composed prolifically. Under the
guidance of Georges Caussade, a teacher
of fugue and counterpoint at the Paris Con¬
servatory and a celebrated harmonist, she
soon became adept at composition. In 1911
and 1912 she composed choral music and
cantatas, including Hymne au soleil ("Hymn
to the Sun").
She entered the Conservatory the fol¬
lowing year and studied with Paul Vidal,
an old friend of Debussy and Liszt, and Mau¬
rice Emmanuel, an enthusiast for modal
music. She practised for the Prix de Rome
with the cantata Pour les funérailles d'un
soldat ("For the Burial of a Soldier") with
words from a play by Alfred de Musset. She
was particularly fond of Debussy, especially
Pelléas et Mélisande and Prélude à l'après-
midi d'un faune, which influenced several
of her works. But she was ahead of her time,
and gradually moved away from impres¬
sionism and found her own voice. In 1913, at
the age of nineteen, she became the first
woman to win the Grand Prix de Rome,
awarded for her cantata Faust et Hélène.
Her works now began to be published, and
Faust et Hélène was performed by the cel¬
ebrated Concerts Colonne in November of
the same year.
In 1914, despite declining health, she
made a trip to Italy that was a revelation to
her, composed in Rome, then returned to
Nice in the South of France where she
began her cycle for voice, Clairières dans le
ciel ("Clearings in the Sky") based on a poem
by Francis Jammes, instrumental pieces and
the Psalms. During the First World War,
Lili and Nadia founded a Franco-American
support committee to send letters and food
parcels to the fighting men. Despite rest,
and an operation in 1917, Lili's health con¬
tinued to decline; she faced adversity with
exemplary courage and serenity. In the last
two years of her life she completed the three
Psaumes ("Psalms") and Vieille prière boud¬
dhique ("Old Buddhist Prayer") for voice
and orchestra, Un matin de printemps ("A
Spring Morning"), for violin (or flute) and
piano, and her masterpiece, Pie Jesu (for
voice, organ, string quartet and harps),
which she was too weak to write herself and
dictated to Nadia from her bed. She died in
Mézy near Paris on 15 March 1918.
Lili always remained an example for
Nadia, who praised her sister's "moral and
spiritual superiority" and "purity".
Throughout her life Nadia steadfastly kept
her sister's memory alive by propagating
her work and infusing into her students the
sacred fire that had burned in Lili. I
THE UNESCO ^)URIERB MARCH 1997 49
