Making a little
go a long way
BY BABACAR SALL
Needy African societies governed by an ethic
of sparing, caring and sharing
Pupils at an open-air school in
Senegal work in the shade of a
tree.
In some parts of Africa frugality is a
quality that is central to social and eco¬
nomic life, partly because poverty has become
so taken for granted in recent years. The Wolof
language has an expression for it: doy lu, which
may be translated as self-sufficiency.
Society is built around the idea of potential
scarcity, and sharing and solidarity are highly
regarded. Seeking personal profit is frowned
on. Building up your own stock of something
means taking away from the group a resource
which it could otherwise use. This has given
rise to an ethic of parsimony and sharing.
Drinking, eating, spending and having a
good time should be done on the basis of
"keep nothing for yourself which could be
useful to someone else", to quote a Wolof
saying. Keeping a share of something for some¬
one else is seen as a way to avoid excess.
Frugality permeates the daily life of Sahe-
lian nomads such as the Peul even in a situation
of abundance. Housing is spartan, light and
made of easy-to-dismantle vegetable matter.
The basic diet consists of dairy products.
Above all, water is using very sparingly.
Another Wolof proverb "tomorrow isn't
today's guest, but we must put something aside
for it" shows how far saving, forced on peo¬
ple by an unpredictable food supply, is rooted
in people's mentalities. Excessive consumption
upsets the future sharing of a product. Most
Senegalese believe God does not give things but
entrusts them to a person's care. In return, peo¬
ple carefully look after what does not belong to
them but which they are given to share.

In Mall, a Dogon farmer
sprinkles his field with water
during the dry season. Such sharing, essential when there is per¬
petual scarcity, governs all social activities
work, income, joy and unhappiness. But this
modern-day harmony only works because of
its ties to a traditional solidarity.
A home-grown
developmentproject
Drought in the 1970s and the widespread
poverty it brought helped to intensify this
frugality in social and official relationships.
Even development projects based themselves
on low-cost methods of organization and
approaches.
The Malian village of Sanankoroba, which
is usually held up as an economic develop¬
ment success story, shows how a mixture of
local organization and modern equipment can
have good and lasting results.
The villagers launched a development pro¬
ject along their own lines in 1984 with the
help of a twinning agreement with the Quebec
town of St. Elizabeth. Instead of foreigners
taking the decisions, the villagers used their
own methods. Public meetings were held and
the supreme tribal authority, the council of
elders, was consulted. The council decided to
extend the decision-making process to other
age-groups, which served as links to different

tribes and to associations of women, young
people and professionals. The council then
gave its opinion and decided how the project
should be carried out.
The 24-member committee that was set up
contained two new elements it had five
women on it and a local farmer as its chairman,
despite the participation of people who had
been trained in developed countries. This break
with the classic pattern of development aid
organization shows a determination to adapt to
local physical conditions. Also, rather than tak¬
ing the name given to the project by the Que-
beckers "Des mains pour demain," or "Hands
for the Future" the villagers chose a name
closer to their way of thinking: Benkadi, or
"good understanding". This name stressed that
the project's goal is unity and social cohesion
rather than transformation and planning, as A technical adviser (right) and
.. , , . , a villager collaborate on a
conveyed by the Canadians name. development project in a rice-
paddy on Morfil island
(Senegal).
So there were two ways of looking at the
project. The Western approach was to shape
the future by technical mastery of time and
space, based on the belief that agricultural
problems are essentially technical and can be
solved by technical means. The African
approach did not systematically take on board
such a concept, since it regards the future as
God's responsibility, so that the relationship
between technical power and divine power
requires careful handling.
These different ways of thinking did not
prevent fruitful co-operation. The main thing
for the villagers of Sanankoroba was to express
their own values in a productive manner with
foreign help, and they managed to do that very-
well. The project led to better integration of
several usually dependent social categories such
as young people, women and lower classes. It
also checked emigration to the capital, Bamako,

A meeting at a micro finance
bank for the needy in a
Gambian village.
and the newly-irrigated fields and bountiful
orchards even lured many back to the village.
Street schools
Another example, this time involving educa¬
tion, shows that consumption of knowledge,
like consumption of anything else, requires
that the product offered be carefully chosen
and adapted to immediate needs.
In Senegal, non-attendance at school, which
mostly affects country areas, has spread to the
towns, with nearly 40 per cent of school-age
children not attending. A system set up by
the government to tackle the problem in pri¬
mary schools in poor areas a half-day of
lessons daily, with some children coming in
the morning and others in the afternoon
has proved inadequate.
The situation has given rise to the creation of
"street schools", mostly in Dakar, with impro¬
vised classes in the street or in the yard of a house
and plain wooden benches. The many children
who attend these schools show how popular
they are, especially as the fees are modest. Among
the subjects taught are human rights, theatre,
Arab language and environmental education.
One basic difference from the state schools is
that classes are usually in the children's mother
tongue rather than French. Another is that the
"street schools" meet the general demand for
children to be taught not in a selective way but
by giving them the basic knowledge to cope
with the society they live in.
The same kind of priorities, springing
from constant scarcity and structural ineffi¬
ciency, apply in the economic and financial
sphere. This has led to rival mail distribution
networks and even banking services mainly
between African states and European coun¬
tries with immigrant populations, like France.
They are run on non-capitalist principles such
as trust and personal and blood relationships.
The "banks for the poor" are another example
of adapting a consumer-oriented capitalist sys¬
tem to local conditions where modest con¬
sumption patterns are the rule.1
All these initiatives, carried out in condi¬
tions of scarcity, poverty and sometimes suffi¬
ciency but never abundance, show that even
needy people can build community projects
with what they have. In this way the link-up
between frugality, economy and society leads
to a new work ethic and gives an example to the
world at a time of increasing breakdown of social
ties and environmental degradation. Perhaps the
ball is now in the rich countries' court	
1 Sec the Unesco Courier, January 1997,
Microfinance helping the poor to help themselves.
Editor
