Listening Joto la Momposina BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE



A Colombian singer iiith a tremendous voice, Toto la Momposina
(Sonia Bazanta) is an internationally known exponent of the rich musical
tradition ofher country's Atlantic seaboard.
I Toto la Momposina is a singer and
I dancer who releases seismic forces
on stage. "The maelstrom of brass and
drums and the colourful costumes made
me think of hack home," said a young
South African dancer after one of Toto's
concerts. " There's the same enthusiasm
and energy that you find in Zulu music."
Toto's band features a trumpet, a bom-
bardino (a precursor of the oboe family), a
guitar and a double bass as well as folk
instruments such as the tiple (a small
twelve-string guitar) and agaïta (a bamboo
or cactus-wood Amerindian ilute). She also
has a percussion section that weaves com¬
plex rhythms with various kinds of drums,
including the deep-toned bombo, bongos,
claves, maracas, guache (seed-filled tubes
that are shaken) and marimbulas (drums
containing small strips of metal). "Drums
make you react in an instinctive and spon¬
taneous way," she explains, "and the music
I perform is basically percussive."
Five-hundred-year-old music
Toto belongs to the fourth generation of a
family of musicians (her father is a drum¬
mer, her mother a singer and dancer). She
was born in Talaigua, a village on Mompos
Island (whence her nickname), in the north¬
ern reaches of Colombia's Magdalena River.
An intensely musical area, this lush, trop
ical region was originally inhabited by Indi¬
ans and then during the colonial period
became a haven for Maroons (fugitive
slaves), who built fortified communities
known 'as palenques.
The best known palenque, located near
Cartagena, was founded in 1608 under the
leadership of the African-born King
Benkos. It still exists, and ancient Angolan
customs are practised there. Maroons and
Indians often intermarried, producing off¬
spring who prized their freedom and orig¬
inality. Musically speaking, Colombia's
Atlantic coast is part of the Caribbean
world, and over the years has produced a
host of intense musical genres that have
emerged from a blend of the African,
Amerindian and Spanish cultures.
As a child, Toto learned the chande,
the mapalé, thefandango, the currulao,
the porro, the puya, the merengue and
the cumbia, all of which are secular or
sacred musical forms. She also learned the
art of the cantadoras, female singers who
improvise coplas (verse couplets). She took
part in fiestas, wakes and ceremonies in
neighbouring villages, listened to the rhyth¬
mic songs of itinerant salesmen and was
taught by many musicians, including the
wonderful cantadora Ramona Ruiz, who
visited the family home.
She made up her mind to devote the
rest of her life to upholding her region's
musical traditions. "You could describe
our music as an enterprise that began 500
years ago," she explains, "a process that
has developed and changed but perpetu¬
ates the village traditions from which it
has emerged. What we want to do is inject
our own energy into it, develop it to the
full and help to strengthen our national
musical identity. We want to help our coun¬
try's music express the culture of all our
people." The baton of tradition has already
been taken up by her son and daughters,
who play in her band, not to mention her
granddaughter, Maria del Mar, who moves
happily around the stage during some of
their concerts.
Humanist and mystic
Toto began her professional career in 1968.
With her own band she has made several
European and Latin American tours. After
a stay in Paris where she studied the his¬
tory of dance at the Sorbonne, sometimes
sang in train stations and on street corners
and cut two records: Tofo La Momposina
(Auvidisc) and Colombia, Music from the
Atlantic Coast (Aspic), she returned to
Colombia. "I was falling prey to ethno-musi-
cologists and needed to recharge my bat¬
teries." She then studied the bolero in
Cuba and incorporated the son, the
guaracha, the rumba and other Cuban
beats popular in Colombia into her reper¬
toire and travelled all over the world.
She dislikes the term folklore which,
she feels, designates ossified forms of
expression, and prefers to talk of tradi¬
tional music or, making a punning refer¬
ence to "folklore", conflor ("with a flower")
music. With its roots in the soil and in tune
with the cosmic order, her country's music
possesses inexhaustible vitality. "At home,"
she says, "the rural people have always
composed music based on nature, and when
music comes from the land, its language
knows no frontiers. When I listen to drum¬
mers from Senegal or the Congo, I can hear
affinities with Cuban, Brazilian and Colom¬
bian drummers."
"Upholding my cultural heritage inter¬
nationally is a mission for me," she says,
"but the road is not easy. There can't be
any stars in this field. I have a spiritual
idea of my art."
