Medieval Europe:
the antecham
of eternity
BY JACQUES LE GOFF
The medieval Christian Church
in Europe created a complex
system of the afterlife which
played on fear
The view of the hereafter current among
men and women in medieval Europe was
largely the Christian one. Although it included
elements borrowed or inherited from Greco-
Roman paganism, from Oriental religions and
beliefs, from the Old Testament and from
Judaism, it was based mainly upon the New
Testament, the Gospels in particular.
Christianity, with its doctrine of salva¬
tion, flourished in those early years of the
Christian era that have been referred to as an
"age of anxiety", and a preoccupation not only
with what became of men and women after
their death but also with the question of where
they would spend the afterlife occupied a
prominent place in it.
Christianity proclaims the resurrection of
the body, of which the resurrection of Jesus
after his earthly life ended on the cross is the
exemplar and the guarantee. What happens to
resurrected human beings depends on the will
of almighty God, but in accordance with rules
that He Himself has laid down, whereby the
fate of the resurrected is made to depend on
their conduct during their earthly life. They are
consigned after the resurrection, which occurs
at the last day, to different, opposite places in
the beyond, in accordance with a binary sys¬
tem. The "good" live forever in a place of
delights, Paradise, while the "bad" are doomed
to dwell eternally in a place of torments, Hell.
A distinction must be drawn between
Heaven and the earthly Paradise, its eternal
mirror-image, Eden. Similarly, "Hell", as a
place of torments for those damned eternally,
is not to be confused with the infernal regions,
closely resembling the Jewish Sheol and the
Greco-Roman Hades or Tartarus, where the
righteous who have not known Christ and
thus could not be baptized (including Adam
Heaven and Hell,
a 15th-century painting of the
School of Bologna (Italy). and Eve, the first human couple) wait for
Christ to come and free them.
The precincts ofParadise
From the early centuries of Christianity and
throughout the Middle Ages, the hereafter was
the subject of a whole range of apocryphal texts
and stories that grew up around the fringes of
Catholic orthodoxy. This was one of the areas
that most exercised the medieval imagination,
inspiring many literary compositions and an
abundant iconography that bear witness to the
fertile creativity of medieval artists.
Christians had from the very beginning
great difficulty in dealing with the Last Judg¬
ment/Hell/Heaven system. The situation of
the two afterworlds in relation to the Earth
was established soon enough: Hell was below
the Earth and Heaven was above, in the sky.
The terms Heaven and Paradise became syn¬
onymous, although for a long time the topog¬
raphy of the world beyond the grave distin¬
guished several heavens, Paradise being "the
highest Heaven". In general terms, two heav¬
ens coexisted: the natural heaven, or sky, knowl¬
edge of which was the province of science (the
o-	...-

Middle Ages had borrowed heavily from the
cosmology of Ancient Greece); and a meta¬
physical Heaven, the everlasting abode of God
and the elect.
The two main questions posed by the here¬
after concern the timing of the judgment
whereby God consigns the departed either to
Heaven or Hell, and the possibility of defer¬
ring the final reckoning to some point in the
period between the death of the individual
and the Last Judgment.
There were two opposing views, both of
them accepted by the medieval Church, on
the first of these points. Some held that all the
deceased must await the Last Judgment at the
end of this world to know their fate in the
world beyond. Others held that God wel¬
comed into Heaven those who were indis¬
putably among the elect, the saints, immedi¬
ately after their death. Either they were exempt
from the Last Judgment or it was in their case
a mere formality, a foregone conclusion.
Various answers were put forward to the
question as to whether those destined to be
among the elect would be able to await the res¬
urrection in a specific place. In the early cen¬
turies of Christianity, such a place was imagined
as a refrigerium, a haven of coolness, the very
antithesis of the devouring fires of hell. Accord¬
ing to another idea, which continued to be held
until the thirteenth century and was frequently
depicted in religious art, the elect-to-be rested
in Abraham's bosom. In all these scenarios
those so privileged after death would be spared
punishment and suffering but would never¬
theless be denied the supreme bliss enjoyed
by those definitively admitted into Heaven,
that of being accorded the grace to see God
face to face, the beatific vision. The invention
of Purgatory in the twelfth century was to
overturn these conceptions.
Guided tours
Living mortals could learn, at least in outline,
about Heaven and Hell from the meagre infor¬
mation supplied by the Bible, and especially
the Gospels, and from the stories of those who
had travelled to the world beyond the grave.
These stories, originating in the Jewish and
Christian apocrypha from the beginning of the
Christian era, developed in the Latin West
mainly from the seventh century onwards. They
were the accounts given by those to whom God
had accorded the grace to visit Hell and Heaven,
often under the guidance of an angel or

Above and opposite page,
detail from The Last Judgment
by the Italian painter Fra
Angélico (1387-1455). Above,
the Damned; opposite page,
the Elect.
archangel, except for the celestial Holy of Holies
where God abided, hidden from their sight.
The principal Latin accounts of these jour¬
neys take the form of visions granted mainly to
monks (monasteries being regarded as places
midway between this world and the next,
between Earth and the hereafter). In the twelfth
century, the account written by an English Cis¬
tercian of the knight Owen's visit to "St.
Patrick's Purgatory" in Ireland definitively
shaped the changed landscape of the afterworld
by localizing Purgatory in a specific place.
As may be seen from the descriptions of
Heaven and Hell in these stories, most Chris¬
tian imagery of the hereafter was drawn fro m
earlier sources. It owes little to the Old Testa¬
ment or to the Jewish tradition, except for
the two paradisiacal themes of the Garden of
Eden and the celestial Jerusalem. Judaism
makes no clear distinction between the grave
and the world beyond it, and the Jewish hell,
Sheol, is a grim and gloomy place that does
not lend itself to description.
The main borrowings of imagery for the
torments of hell are from India and to an even
greater extent from Iran and Egypt. In ancient
Greek mythology, Orpheus, Pollux, Theseus,
Heracles, and Odysseus (in Book XI of the
Odyssey) all descend into the underworld, but
the main heritage in this respect is from Rome,
namely from Aeneas' voyage into the infernal
regions, in Book VI of Virgil's Aeneid. This
was where the two abodes of the dead were
reached, by first going down into the cavern
that served as an antechamber, through the fields
where the souls of the unburied dead wandered
and across the river Styx, before turning either
left into Tartarus (Hell) or right into the
Elysian Fields (Heaven).
The main features of the Christian image of
the world beyond had taken definitive shape
by the early Middle Ages.
Torment and delight
To get there involved standing trial either col¬
lectively, at the Last Judgment, or individually.
In the former case, the leading role was played
by Christ, throned in judgment in a setting
reminiscent of the courts of Ancient Rome,
and verdicts were handed down after consul¬
tation of the books kept by the angels, in
which men's good and bad deeds are recorded.
In the latter case, the crucial moment comes
with the weighing of souls after the resurrec¬
tion. The Archangel Gabriel holds the great

scales, while the gatekeeper of Heaven, St. Peter,
and the Master of Hell, Satan, vie for posses¬
sion of the soul by pulling down on one side
or other of the scales. When the verdict has
been rendered, the elect ascend into Heaven,
where St. Peter opens the gate for them, while
the damned are pitched into the jaws of Hell.
Heaven is a place of peace and rejoicing
where the senses of the elect are delighted by
flowers and light for the eyes, songs for the
ears, fragrant odours for the nose, the taste
of delicious fruits for the mouth and fabrics
soft to the touch (since in their modesty the
elect usually wear beautiful white robes, only
a few artists portraying them as restored to
the naked state of the innocent in Eden before
the Fall). Heaven is sometimes shown as gir¬
dled with high walls of precious stones and
consisting of concentric areas, also surrounded
by walls, where the colours, the fragrances,
the tastes and the harmonies become more and
more delightful the nearer they come to the
Centre, the abode of God, who holds the
beatific vision in reserve. Whereas in Genesis
Paradise was a garden, in keeping with the cli¬
matic conditions and the mythopoeic tradi¬
tions of the East, in the medieval West, a world
of towns ancient and modern, Heaven was
generally conceived of as a walled city, on the
model of the celestial Jerusalem, and it was
strictly reserved for the righteous who had
been baptized, baptism being the necessary,
albeit insufficient, passport to Paradise.
The invention ofpurgatory
Hell is a place of inextinguishable flames that
unrelentingly burn the damned, giving off
blackish smoke and a fearsome red glow that
sheds the only light on a world of darkness, ter¬
rifying cries, noises and stench, a hell in red
and black. Worse still, the damned are forever
doomed to suffer cruel torments inflicted by
hideous demons. The landscape, when it can
be glimpsed, is a horrible scene of steep moun¬
tains, deep chasms, stinking rivers and lakes of
molten metal, reptiles and monsters. The way
into hell is either by being cast down a wellshaft
or by taking a bridge over the abyss that
becomes narrower and more slippery the fur¬
ther one goes across it. Hell is sometimes
divided into different parts that receive differ¬
ent categories of sinners; at other times it is all
of a piece but arranged in circles, each specializ¬
ing in some particular punishment for the
damned, or in levels of ever-increasing dark¬
ness and burning heat that lead down to the
ultimate depth where Satan reigns in person.
Although medieval Christian imagery of
the hereafter owes a great deal to that of pagan¬
ism, it differs from it structurally in one essen¬
tial way. Heaven and Hell are not next door
to each other in the underworld but arc placed
on a vertical plane, in symbolic accordance
with the Christian representation of space,
with the heavens above (good) and the infer¬
nal regions below (evil).
22 r
^ THE UNESCO lOURIER MARCH 1998
Relations existed in time and space between
the quick and the dead, God, Satan and peo¬
ple; in other words the eternal world beyond
made its presence felt in earthly life. Angels
continually descended to Earth and mounted
up into the heavens again, as, more seldom,
did the Son of God and the Virgin, while the
wicked demons and Satan himself likewise
came and went between Earth and Hell. The
hereafter played a role in earthly history. Quite
apart from the rare voyages of a few favoured
individuals to the realms beyond, visions,
miracles, signs and portents established what
medieval Europe saw as the relationship
between this world and the next.
Orpheus in the Underworld
(1594), oil on copper by the
Flemish painter Jan Bruegel,
known as Velvet Bruegel
(1568-1625).

The linchpin of the system, however, was
not Heaven, but Hell. To urge Christians to
work out their salvation, the Catholic church
employed fear of hellfire rather than desire for
Heaven. In the face of death, they were less
afraid of dying than of Hell, and Christianity
thus became, with some slight variations of
emphasis, a religion of fear.
The bipolar character of the Christian after-
world continued more or less unchanged until
the twelfth century, when major religious and
social changes resulted in a new society with a
new view not only of this world but also of
the next.
St. Augustine had divided men into four
categories: the "entirely good", who were des¬
tined for Heaven, the "entirely evil", who were
consigned to Hell; and the "not entirely good"
and "not entirely evil", the fate ordained by
God for these last two categories being some¬
what uncertain. It was supposed that those
who died with only a "light" burden of sin
upon them would rid themselves of it in the
afterlife by undergoing "purgatorial penal¬
ties", passing through "purgatorial fire" sim¬
ilar to hellfire, in "purgatorial places" whose
location remained very vague. In the latter half
of the twelfth century, a separate place was
invented for those whose admission to the
number of the elect had been deferred. This

was Purgatory, the "third place of the world
beyond", midway between Heaven and Hell,
which would vanish at the Day of Judgment
and would be emptied when all its inhabi¬
tants rose up into Heaven.
The amount of time spent in Purgatory
depended on three factors. It was in the first
place proportional to the number of sins
(referred to thereafter as "venial", i.e.
redeemable and thus allowing the sinner to
avoid damnation, as against irredeemable mor¬
tal sins) with which the dead were burdened at
the time of their death. It depended next on the
suffrages (prayers, alms and masses) offered by
living relatives and friends to reduce the length
of time spent by certain "souls" in Purgatory.
Lastly, the Church could obtain a remission of
the time still to be served in Purgatory, in
jreturn for money the indulgences in which
the Church carried on a growing trade from
the thirteenth century onwards. Purgatory, it
should be added, was a one-way street. Souls
could only go on from there to Heaven, and
not back towards Hell.
This "third place", which reduced the pop¬
ulation of Hell and replaced the binary system
of the afterworld by a more complex, less rigid
system in keeping with the evolution of the
"estates" of society on Earth, and which was
widely disseminated by the friars of the Men¬
dicant orders established in the early thir¬
teenth century (Dominicans and Franciscans),
was of the greatest importance.
In a Purgatory resembling Hell,
an angel's hands reach out to
a soul which has completed its
time of penitence. Detail of a
17th-century mural from the
church of Saint Laurent in the
Tinée valley, southern France.
The triumph ofdeath
It brought about the triumph of the idea of
individual judgment at the moment of death
and, in conjunction with the fact that at least
one yearly confession was imposed on all indi¬
viduals by a decree of the Fourth Lateran
Council in 1215, it contributed greatly to the
affirmation of the individual in relation to
groups and orders. It transformed the social
structures and behaviour patterns in the world
of the living and resulted in a mathematical
attitude to sins and penances that gave rise, at
this point in history when trade and the mer¬
chant class were developing rapidly, to a kind '
of book-keeping approach to the afterlife. It
also contributed to a great increase in the
power of the Church (which in the thirteenth
century designated the existence of Purgatory
as dogma) over the dead, inasmuch as the suf¬
frages and indulgences of which it was in charge
gave it an authority, previously exercised by
God alone, to administer justice in the after-
world of Purgatory.
In this period when the new society of the
thirteenth century was being put in place on
Earth, the geography and system of the after-
world (that of St. Bernard and St. Thomas
Aquinas) took definite shape. The basic system
was that of the essential "three places" Hell,
Purgatory and Heaven made up to five by the
addition of two limbos: the limbuspatrum, or
limbo of the patriarchs, the former abode of
the just who died before Christ's incarnation
and the institution of baptism, the place that was
to be emptied byJesus when He descended into
Hell to take its inhabitants up into Heaven; and
the limbus infantium, or children's limbo, the
abode of infants dying without baptism.
It was this new arrangement of the after-
world that inspired the great masterpiece of
medieval Christian literature, Dante's Divina
Commedia (early fourteenth century), in
which the author, guided by the ancient
Roman poet Virgil, visits every part of the
afterworld the circles of the Inferno where
the damned are punished severally according to
their respective categories of mortal sin, and the
terraces of Purgatory, which is presented as a
mountain that has to be climbed to attain the
beauties and joys of Paradise.
A study of fifteenth-century texts and
images raises the question as to whether by
the end of the Middle Ages people still believed
in Hell. It seems that, despite the best efforts
of the Church, such a belief was by that time
much watered down. Christians, showing
signs of the emergence of a modern sensibility,
were now afraid not so much of Hell as of the
phase that immediately precedes the afterlife
death itself.
