COMMENTARY Federico Mayor
A shared future
I Day by day our planet is shrinking. Today it
I is smaller and more fragile than yesterday.
And yet arc wc really any "closer" to each other?
The interdependence of the peoples and nations
making up our world has become self-evident. No
country, however powerful in terms of its economy
or population, can any longer get by completely on
its own. Transnational problems whether they
be environmental, cultural or economic can no
longer be solved at the national level. It is through
international strategies, through concerted action
between states and between regions that such
problems can be addressed. Poverty, Aids, pol¬
lution, climate change, drugs and violence know
no boundaries, whether national, ethnic, natural
or political.
Globalization also means that the issues are
interconnected. The sectoral, specialized, disci¬
pline-specific approach has shown its limitations,
and these are becoming more and more of a con
straint as real life, or at least our awareness of it,
grows in complexity. Bioethics is an obvious exam¬
ple of a domain that "cuts across" several disci¬
plines. If we wish to influence reality, we must
adopt a transdisciplinary approach that makes use
of all available expertise and skills.
This awareness of the interdependence of
human beings and of the interconnectedncss of
the issues they face has become clearly apparent
in recent years at the highest levels of political
action and in global forums. Within the United
Nations system, a series of major conferences has
highlighted the connections between the various
challenges we must take up between environ¬
ment and development, for example, and between
education and population. Jomtien, New Delhi,
Vienna, Cairo, Copenhagen and Beijing are among
the cities that have hosted these global summits.
Too long overlooked or neglected, the human
dimension is once again compelling recognition as
'Compare the hundreds of billions of dollars siphoned off
by the arms or drug trade with national education budgets.
What a shameful disparity!'

'We must multiply our bonds of allegiance, build more bridges
between the individual and communities of various kinds and sizes,
strengthen "community citizenship" while at the same time
promoting the idea of "world citizenship".'
or no future
the measure of all things . In the United Nations sys¬
tem, the approach to social development, to human
development has become broader, more diverse
and more flexible. Human beings, with all their
unfathomable qualities, their strengths and weak¬
nesses, are again moving to the centre of the eco¬
nomic stage.
And yet . . . compare the hundreds of billions
of dollars siphoned off by the arms or drug trade
with national education budgets! What a shameful
disparity! Is not education a fundamental human
right?
"Ecce homo. Behold the man!" exclaimed Pope
John Paul II at UNESCO's Paris Headquarters eigh¬
teen years ago in an address that left its mark on all
of us. "Behold the man! . . . the rich creativity of
the human mind" which makes "untiring efforts
to fathom and affirm the identity of man . . . always
present in every form of culture".
For human beings to be worthy of the name,
they must "belong" to the human species and expe¬
rience that sense of belonging. If they know and
feel themselves to be members of the human fam¬
ily, they will have no difficulty in assisting their fel¬
low beings without ranking people close to them
any higher than those who are far away. We must
multiply our bonds of allegiance, that is to say,
build more bridges between the individual and
communities of different kinds and sizes, strengthen
"community citizenship" while at the same time
promoting the idea of "world citizenship", and
think globally while acting locally, so that human
solidarity may flourish.
The "intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind", seen by UNESCO's Constitution as the
basis of lasting peace, is a form of solidarity targeted
at social disparities, one which strives against intol¬
erance, jolts indifference and builds bridges
between haves and have-nots, between Muslim and
Jew, between prince and pauper. It is an active
kind of solidarity between individuals who may be
poles apart in many ways, a sense of community in
diversity. And it is that solidarity, which grows up
between different languages and cultures, beliefs
and customs, ways of being and of thinking, and
soon becomes indestructible, that makes people
accept the idea of sharing, and indeed want to share.
Share their riches, resources and knowledge,
and also their doubts. It is this universal impera¬
tive which must underpin our individual and col¬
lective thoughts and actions. Though we now
know and have known for several decades that
we, as civilizations, arc mortal, it is only right that
we should also know, as human beings, that the
future will be one of sharing or there will be no
future at all.
