
The Dôme Flore oilfield off the coast of Sene-
gal and Guinea-Bissau, 70 kilometres sou-
thwest of the Casamance river, has caused
the two countries plenty of headaches since it wa s
discovered by France’s Total company in 1960.
The only known offshore oilfield within their eco-
nomic zone,which is also rich in fishing resources,
its reserves are put at 100 million tonnes of heav y
oil and only one million tonnes of light.Clearly,
the economic stakes are high.
Senegal-Guinea Bissau
Agreeing to share
After 16 years of legal battles and a few
skirmishes in 1991, the two countries opted for
a pragmatic settlement of their territorial dis-
pute and in October 1993 signed an agreement
to manage and develop their mari t i m e
resources jointly. Until then, such an outcome
had seemed a remote possibility.
The earliest negotiations date back to 1977.
When the two countries failed to reach agree-
ment, they decided in 1985 to take the case to
arbitration before a tribunal. Four years later
the court upheld a Franco-Portuguese agree-
ment of 1960 establishing the maritime boun-
dary between their two colonies. But Guinea
Bissau rejected this decision, arguing that the
tribunal had failed to provide a map showing
the exact boundary, as the two parties had
requested.
In March 1991, Guinea-Bissau lodged an
appeal against the decision with the
‘The Oceans,a Heritage for the Future” is the
theme of EXPO ’9 8 , the 20th century ’s last
gr e at intern ational exposition. C o i n c i d i n g
with the 500th annive rs a ry of Po rtuguese nav i g at o r
Vasco da Gama’s explorat o ry journey to the Indies,
the exposition is being held in Lisbon,the capital of
Po rt u g a l , from 22 May to 30 September.
With over 145 countries taking part , and an
expected 15 million visitors , EXPO ’98 offers a
unique opportunity to increase public awa r e n e s s
about the ocean and about United Nations acti-
vities in this fie l d .The UN pav i l i o n , set up under
the joint leadership of UNESCO and the United
N at i o n s , is highlighting the whole range of co-
o p e r at i ve ocean-related activities carried out by
the United Nations fa m i l y, as well as the monito-
ring and research activities of UNESCO’s
I n t e r g ove rnmental Oceanographic Commission
( I O C ) . This public inform ation campaign is
taking place within the context of the
