The changing role of prison staff
BY ABDEL-AZIM WAZIR sai
lrffi\ÍMPrt«TM\\Mm
The role of the prison service has
changed. It is no longer simply concerned
with keeping prisoners under lock and key. It
1 seeks to equip them to return to live in society.
Correctional facilities have become an
important social tool. They systematically use
advanced methods and call on a wide variety of
experts doctors, pharmacists, nurses, teach¬
ers, librarians, coaches and art instructors.
Chaplains take inmates into their pastoral care,
and psychiatrists, psychologists and social
workers help them sort out their lives. Last
but not least, each facility must see to it that
inmates leave prison with a trade or profes¬
sion, whether carpentry or engineering.
Each staff member must have the scientific
or technical background required for his or her
field, as well as special training to work in a cor¬
rectional facility. Most are employees although
some are volunteers, especially in the area of
social services. Volunteers are often very helpful
because of the trust they inspire in prisoners.
Administrative staff and warders, as well as
specialists, have to learn special skills so that
they do not lose sight of their role as educa¬
tors. Professional and administrative staff can
Opposite page, a homeless
child is questioned at an
intake centre (Romania).
Opposite page below, a warder
in a London prison for women
holds a baby belonging to a
prisoner.
Below, anxious families ask for
news about their children after
a police round-up in Rio de
Janeiro (Brazil).

do their jobs well only if there is a healthy
relationship between inmates and warders.
Progress in training courses, which cover
social problems as well as specific professional
topics, is measured by theoretical and practi¬
cal testing. Raising the level of recruitment in



this way enhances the social standing of prison
employees and helps ensure they will work
with a spirit of integrity.
It is just as important to provide training
for serving prison staff, most of whom began
their careers when prior training was not
required. Trained personnel should also have
regular opportunities to brush up on their
skills and update their working methods.
