■ You’re a star of African music. But is
there such a thing as African music?
There are countless kinds of music in
Africa. Every region has its own traditio-
nal sounds. Then there’s modern African
music, which combines local and foreign
influences, and that’s what I’m part of.
The two currents inspire each other.
Traditional music is more vibrant when
m o d e rn perform e rs make use of its
potential and variety.
■ What does music mean to you?
It’s a kind of natural force. Especially in
Africa, where there’s something musical
in the air, in people’s bodies, in the way
they move. Africans don’t read much.
They listen. And they listen with their
bodies. The first thing about a song is its
rhythm. But you can use its power to
convey a message, to express commit-
ment or to make people happy.
■ How do you write your songs?
Fifteen or twenty of my compositions
came naturally.The rest I had to work on.
To write them, I shut myself away and
concentrate on a single topic. Today I
must say that Africa has never been so
ready to assert itself on the world stage.
The head of the United Nations is an
African. African culture is like a moving
train. Its locomotive is music which can
produce universal melodies.
■ How did you come to World Music?
Gradually. I started out when I was thir-
teen, singing with friends.Then I was in a
more modern group, which played tradi-
tional music on modern instru m e n t s.
That way I got to play in nightclubs in
Dakar.Then my music took off. It started
travelling and I was invited to follow it.As
I listened to other kinds of sounds,
through meeting stars like Peter Gabriel,
I came up with a new form of expression.
■ What obstacles have you encountered
in the course of your career?
At first my father was against it. He said
people looked down on musicians and he
was afraid that might rub off on him. He
didn’t want to see me drinking or taking
drugs. In my country, the relationship
between parents and children is heavily
influenced by tradition and Islam. Even
after the age of twenty, children must
obey their fathers. I was very young and I
did a deal with mine: I’d behave myself
totally as long he let me be a musician. I
also thank God and my father for giving
me good health and enabling me to be a
role model for young people. But I don’t
condemn people who drink or smoke
dope. Some of them are very talented.
■ Many African musicians live in Western
countries, but you don’t. What keeps
you in Senegal?
My family, in the broadest sense of the
word. Not just my wife and children. A
family is really something. I’ve agreed to
take over from my father and keep an eye
on everything and everyone.That’s what



Youssou N’Dour
A f r i c a ’s world musician
The rise of a s t a r
With his round face, slender physique and
deceptively adolescent appearance, 39-year-
old Youssou N’Dour seems younger than his
age.
Even though his mother was a singer, a
future as a star of “world music” was hardly
on the cards for a boy born in a poor district
of Dakar, Senegal.His dream was to become
a footballer.
His father, a mechanic, gave him a strict
upbringing and wanted young Youssou to be
a model child,like his 20 brothers and sisters.
N’Dour, whose schooling went as far as
secondary level, managed to convince him
that it was possible to be a musician without
becoming a juvenile delinquent. In 1979,
when he was 20, he formed his own group,
l’Etoile de Dakar (which became Le Super
Etoile in 1981) and created his own style of
music, Mbalax, from the name of a traditio-
nal Wolof dance.
It took him 15 years to win international
recognition. This came in 1986 when he
caught the attention of Peter Gabriel.
Through Gabriel,N’Dour got to know a num-
ber of famous English-language singers who
introduced him to the state-of-the-art tech-
nology of the major recording studios.
In 1989 N’Dour really reached the top in
world music with his album The Lion, and
then went on to work with pop stars like
Neneh Cherry, with whom he shared a gold
disc in 1994 for their song Seven Seconds.
Twenty-six years after he started singing,
N’Dour is the author of 115 songs. His fame
spread even wider when his song La Cour des
Grands was chosen as the official anthem for
the 1998 World Cup. But he has always kept
his feet on the ground and keeps a cool head
even when talking about issues like racism,
drugs or poverty. He discusses them with the
same gentleness found in his songs.
S. A. O. ■
A leading figure in World Music, Senegal’s Youssou N’Dour
wants to use his success to aid humanitarian causes and
encourage the development of talented young African
musicians.

T A L K I N G T O . . .
THE UNESCO COURIER 79
keeps me at home. Pe r f o rm e rs leave
Senegal because there’s nothing there to
help them fulfil their potential. This has
made me want to change things. But I can
go whenever I want to. There’s an airport
in Dakar and you don’t need an exit visa
to leave.
■ You bring the people around you into
your creative universe. How do you
reconcile loyalty to friends with the
need for quality?
I started from nothing. Just me and a few
musicians. I really had to talk them into
forming a group. At the time, everyone
was afraid people would look down on
them. Relatives and friends were the first
people to join me.Then other people did.
But first and foremost I’m a professional.
When someone has to be fired I don’t
hesitate, whether it’s a member of my
family or not. It’s all in the way you go
about it. For example, if someone in my
studio isn’t getting anywhere, I tell them
to go and work with the sound techni-
cians. They soon get fed up and leave of
their own accord.
■ What are you doing to encourage
artistic creativity in Senegal?
I started a record label, Gololi, which in
Wolof means the bells which horses have
round their necks. It works with the stu-
dio I have in Dakar, called Xipi (“open
eyes” in Wolof).The label produces seven
artists a year and their work is distributed
in Senegal and internationally through
our partners, foreign record companies
which have faith in us.That’s how Cheikh
Lo, a Senegalese musician I produced,
was launched.The critics have given him
rave reviews, and World Circuit is distri-
buting him successfully. I’m also working
so that one day Senegalese can take over
the recording and technical side of their
music. At the moment, we’re 90-per-cent
dependent on Westerners. That’s not a
bad thing in itself but local professionals
can do better because they know the lan-
guage and understand our music more
quickly. So I organize training sessions,
sometimes pay for courses in Paris and
take young people on tour abroad. About
80 per cent of the professional performers
in Dakar today started out with me.
■ Do you think governments should help
encourage artistic creation?
The state should protect the rights of
artists but let creativity develop freely.
Pirating is a plague in Africa. Performers
can’t make a living from their own work.
At least half my songs are copied in
Senegal and up to 80 per cent elsewhere
in Africa. Governments should fight that
by strengthening and enforcing copyright

80 THE UNESCO COURIER
laws. At the moment, if a guy is caught
bringing an illegal truckload of pirated
cassettes into Senegal, weeks go by before
they can be confiscated. By that time, he’s
sold them.
■ Why aren’t you involved in distribution?
You can’t do everything—write, produce,
manufacture and distribute as well. The
traditional outlets are there, especially in
the markets. They shouldn’t be destroyed
but built up with organization.
■ Do you promote new talent by working
with other African stars to co-ordinate
efforts across the continent?
Indirectly. But there isn’t much co-opera-
tion. Performers can only help by finding
backers at government level. Then it’s a
A child of the Medina 
1 0 : 3 0 . a . m . , the Medina. Men and women sit chatting under the shade of the neem trees lining 15th
S t r e e t , the sound of their voices occasionally drowned out by children’s cries. All along the street, v e n-
dors sit under big parasols with their wares—a jumble of school textbooks, Koranic pamphlets, s e c o n d -
hand clothing and assorted potions—spread out on the ground in front of them. The wall of a seasho-
re Muslim cemetery closed decades ago after it became full, is at the far end. The house where Yo u s s o u
N ’dour was born is just across the street.
It wasn’t hard to fin d .“ Youssou N’Dour’s house? Straight on, at the end. When you get there, a s k
again and anyone will show you which one it is.”The building where the famous singer lived until he wa s
a teenager is having work done on it and is for the moment uninhabited.
A childhood friend, A.N., says: “Youssou N’Dour is from here. As a child, all he knew was the
Medina.” With a hint of nostalgia in his voice, he recalls long hours spent drinking tea together, playing
football or performing with the Khandrang Jazz band,formed at the end of the 1960s with a group of
friends whom the future star introduced to singing. They accompanied him on castanets.
Hardly anything is left of those days. As he became famous, the singer stopped seeing his “real”
friends of old,says A.N.,hastening to add that this is because “You”,N’Dour’s nickname in these parts,
has “bad advisers.” But,he says, “he’s a good guy and if he came by in his car, he’d stop and say hello
to me.”
Neighbours say “You” is seldom seen these days on 15th Street. He lives in the classy suburb of
Almadies, near Yoff airport.“But we’d love it if he
dropped by,” says one woman,obviously proud of
the singer’s success.
Another local, Aziz, says that if “You” was
more visible, the fans would not run after him so
much. Aziz, who has a degree in management
from a European university and was a playmate of
N’Dour’s, says the singer is warm-hearted, but
complains that he has not used his wealth to do
anything to help relieve the Medina’s chronic
youth unemployment problem.
Abdoulaye Camara is permanent secretary of
“Harmony and Initiative in the Medina” (Cime),
an association set up last year after a suggestion
made by N’Dour, its president. He sees things
quite differently. “He comes to three-quarters of
our meetings and if he can’t make it he always
lets us know,” he says. Camara is proud that many
people are keen to fund the activities of “You’s”
association. The singer, his hero, is “manna for the
Medina,” he says.
An onlooker adds that everyone in the
Medina is fond of N’dour because of his “modes-
ty, efficiency, kindness and sense of friendship.”
True or false? Aziz the young professional who
wants “You” to do something specific,had never
heard of the association and says when asked
about its impact that he’ll “believe it when he
sees it.”
C. T. N. ■
T A L K I N G T O . . .

THE UNESCO COURIER 81
matter for ministers of culture, who have
to push through laws and make sure
they’re in line with regulations set up by
i n t e rn ational bodies such as the
Organization of African Unity.There’s no
point in passing a law in Senegal if there
isn’t one in Mali.
■ Is there a balanced relationship
between artists from countries of the
South and the labels in the North?
Even though I’m with Sony, I think major
record companies have failed, in spite of
the big investments they’ve made in
African music over the past decade.They
interfere with the creat i ve process by
trying to push modern songs instead of
helping artists to do their creative best.
They’re like banks—if you’re not profi-
table, they drop you. I learned that lesson
the hard way when Virgin dumped me.
They expected me to sell as well as Peter
Gabriel or Phil Collins, two of their stars.
I sold a quarter of a million discs but it
wasn’t enough.They wanted a million.
■ Is there an alternative to this system?
We have to create A f rican recording
labels. Bob Marley reached the whole
world because he got help at home, in
Jamaica. Our music must be created in
Africa, but we musn’t stop travelling,
meeting other artists and listening to
other sounds. My dream is to change the
system. When my contract with Sony
expires in about five years time, after I’ve
made the three albums I owe them, I’ll
come back to my own label and cut a sales
deal with Sony. Whatever happens, you
have to stick with an international label if
you want to get distributed.
■ You campaign for humanitarian causes,
including the fight against poverty.
Where do you start in Africa?
By communicating. Everyone must have
the right to voice an opinion—the poor,
the rich, the middle class. They don’t
know each other and their paths never
cross. I want to use my music to bring
them together. I perform everywhere—
from city suburbs to the poorest villages.
When there’s no electricity, we make do
with a generator to try and put on as good
a show as we would in Paris. Artists have
power and should use it to get their mes-
sages across.
■ Which is more important, working at
the grassroots or at the international
level?
They go together. At first, I was encoura-
ged to work with organizations like UNI-
CEF, for which I’m a “goodwill ambassa-
dor,” and Amnesty International. They
opened my eyes.You see your own coun-
try clearer when you’re far away. Working
with these organizations gave me the idea
of setting up an association in the neigh-
bourhood where I was born, the Medina,
a wonderful ragbag of contradictions.
Like my music.
■ But you left to live in a smarter part of
town.
I live in A l m a d i e s , but my heart ’s still in the
M e d i n a . I go back there ve ry often, my
best friends live there and there’s no reason
to think I wo n ’t return to live there one
d ay.
■ How does your organization work?
I contribute 250,000 CFA francs (about
$420) a year.We started out with an exhi-
bition to help young people to get to
know the neighbourhood’s history and
problems. We’d like to see the local archi-
tecture more in line with the Medina’s

needs. Meanwhile, we’re tackling the rub-
bish problem by organizing set setal days,
when everyone joins in cleaning up—
sweeping up and painting bright murals
over anti-government graffiti.
■ You’re a political fireman, then. Don’t
you think opposition is necessary?
Neighbourhood walls aren’t the best
place to protest against the government.
It’s better to do that through politics.
■ You even endorsed Ibrahim Bare
Mainassara’s January 1996 coup in
Niger by giving a concert there two
months later. Why?
I wanted to help calm things down, to
make the people of Niger smile again. I’m
dead against any kind of violence. It’s bet-
ter to have an illegal government than
civil war.
■ You campaign for human rights, yet
you’re in favour of polygamy. Isn’t there
a contradiction there?
I’m a practising Muslim and Islam allows
polygamy. Anyway, is it really a denial of
human rights?
■ It’s against equality between the sexes.
Are you in favour of polyandry?
No. Anyway, for the moment I’ve only got
one wife. But I believe religion comes
before all else.
■ Even human rights?
Yes and no. Polygamy aside, I’m in favour
of human rights. I’m against female cir-
cumcision and believe in the emancipa-
tion of women. But I also think women
should remain the guardians of African
values, like family harmony.
■ People say you’re a multi-millionaire. Is
that in CFA francs or dollars?
I’ve worked hard.But I don’t measure my
success in terms of money. Instead I try to
make it an example for other Africans to
follow. I reinvest some of my fortune to
help them along that path. The World
Cup song will bring in a lot of money.
Some of it can be used to fund a large-
scale humanitarian effort in A f ri c a .
Several associations are working on that.
Nothing’s decided yet, but I’d like to
extend my activities to this kind of thing
in Africa. We need it, don’t you think? ■
Interview by Sophie Boukhari 
and Seydou Amadou Oumarou
Birth of a myth
Youssou N’Dour’s talent and charisma are not
enough to explain his international success. H i s
breakthrough on the pop scene, which took
place at the same time as World Music wa s
catching on in the West during the 1980s, i s
partly the result of a non-stop communications
e f f o r t . “His press attachés have succeeded in
positioning him in the place he deserves,” s a y s
François Belorgey, former director of the Fr e n c h
cultural centre in Dakar. “He was already tre-
mendously popular at home.”
The singer soon “realized how necessary it
is to cultivate a commitment compatible with
his artistic intelligence,” says Senegalese uni-
versity teacher Ousmane Diakhaté. He was ins-
pired by musicians like Peter Gabriel, a human
rights activist. His sensibility did the rest. H i s
appeal is based on the “ s i n c e r i t y ” of his huma-
n i t a r i a n i s m , says Mr. B e l o r g e y.
His attachment to his country’s culture and
his climb to the top of the charts have made
him a role model for local young people, a d d s
M r. B e l o r g e y. They can identity with the soft-
s p o ken native of the Medina, a poor Dakar
n e i g h b o u r h o o d . That is explained, M r.D i a k h a t é
s a y s, by “the need for a myth” which appears
in times of  crisis, when people want to be
r e a s s u r e d . S. A . O. ■
T A L K I N G T O . . .
