No one would deny that prevention is
better than cure. But in the poorest
countries,should treatment of Aids
p atients be neglected in favour of preve n t i o n
on the grounds that caring for them is pro-
hibitively expensive?
Thirty million people worldwide are
infected with the virus that causes Aids,
and over 90 per cent of new cases of
contamination occur in countries of the
South. Africa south of the Sahara alone
has two-thirds of all reported cases. The
disease is out of control in Asia—five mil-
lion people in India may be HIV-positive.
Meanwhile,the number of reported cases
continues to diminish in Europe and fell
by 27 per cent in 1997, says the World
Health Organizat i o n ’s European
Monitoring Centre. Mortality rates from
Aids are down in all the industrialized

to administer. At a time when govern-
ments everywhere are scaling back their
assistance to developing countries, insti-
tutions are lowering their expectations
and reasoning in terms of cost-effective-
ness, thus losing sight of the problem’s
ethical dimension.
The ethical question exists at three
l e ve l s. C o n s i d e ring the drop in public
d e velopment aid, should funds be earm a r-
ked to pay for expensive Aids treat m e n t ?
Should nothing be done until the new
d rugs are available for all? Given the high
cost of retroviral dru g s , would it be ri g h t
to select some patients for treatment and
not others? It will take at least another ten
ye a rs to develop an HIV va c c i n e . In the
m e a n t i m e , something must be done.
countries.Would the results have been the
same if prevention had been the only stra-
tegy used? Could so much have been
achieved with the same meagre funds
allocated to the countries of the South,
where per capita spending on Aids is 100
times lower than in the developed world?
Yet the European Commission, the
leading international contributor to Aids
programmes in the developing nations,
and the World Bank, in its 1997 report
Confronting Aids, say the money should be
spent almost entirely on preve n t i o n .
World Bank experts argue that treating
Aids patients would be at the expense of
caring for victims of other diseases which
are just as deadly, especially since anti-
Aids drugs are expensive and complicated
As Aids continues to spread
in most countries of the
South, should its victims be
deprived of access to
treatment? A moral case is
increasingly being voiced
against the cost-effective
approach to medicine.
Right now, access to care in the vast
majority of developing countries is limi-
ted at best to treatment for opportunistic
infections. Moreover, medical treatment
is usually not free, so the poorest people
have no access to it. Do we have the right
to ignore the plight of these suffering mil-
lions? A recent study in Thailand showed
that the rate of HIV transmission from
mother to foetus could be halved by
administering AZT over a short period to
pregnant women before they give birth.
Since 550,000 babies are born with the
HIV virus each year, it is easy to imagine
how many lives AZT could save.
High stakes
The debate has been raging for some
t i m e . A rnaud Mart y - L ava u z e l l e , p r e s i-
dent of Aides, a French non-governmen-
tal organization,says it started at the 1994
i n t e rn ational conference on Aids in
Yokohama. “We really became aware that
it wasn’t enough to rely on prevention
strategies alone,” he says. “With the new
drugs and the need to transform the
disease’s image, we believed it was neces-
sary . . . to include the dimension of
access to care.” Specialists increasingly
blame the failure of prevention pro-
grammes on the lack of simultaneous
treatment. Indeed, it is difficult to see
how prevention could work if no treat-
ment is offered after a positive HIV test.
The idea that prevention and treatment
must go hand-in-hand to provide an
across-the-board response to the epide-
mic is making headway. “Of course pre-
vention is essential. But it would be une-
Gambian women Aids victims and their newborn babies in a family planning centre.
Will they have access to tre a t m e n t ?



prevention or care

thical and counter-productive to write off
the millions of people with Aids as a lost
cause. The long-standing dichotomy bet-
ween prevention and care is really a thing
of the past,” says Dr. Awa Marie Coll
Seck, director of the United Nations’
UNAids programme.
On 5 November 1997, U N A i d s
announced the start of an initiat i ve aimed
at improving access to HIV drugs in deve-
loping countri e s. Four countri e s — V i e t
N a m , U g a n d a , Chile and Côte d’Ivo i r e —
are taking part . To implement the pilot
p r o grammes they will have to gear their
health care infrastructures and drug distri-
bution systems to the special needs crea-
ted by HIV, and their ministries of health
will have to provide the bulk of the fun-
d i n g . A f rican organizations of people
living with the Aids virus are hopeful that
r e t r oviral drugs will soon be available in
their countri e s , but so far none of the pilot
p r o grammes has really got under way.
Political overtones
The debate has spilled over into the politi-
cal arena, which may speed things up. O n
7 December French President Ja c q u e s
C h i r a c, addressing the 10th pan-Afri c a n
conference on A i d s , in Abidjan (Côte
d ’ I vo i r e ) , s a i d , “it would be shocking,
unacceptable and contrary to the most
basic principles of solidarity to adopt a
t wo-speed approach to A i d s. . . . We must
do all we can to extend the benefits of the
new treatments to needy people in A f ri c a
and the rest of the wo r l d .” The next day
French health minister Bernard Kouchner
suggested setting up an Intern at i o n a l
Therapeutic Solidarity Fund with the aim
of making access to treatment easier. T h e
fund was discussed at length during the
G8 summit held in Birmingham (UK)
from 15 to 17 May. The snag: finding the
$5 billion funding. T h at may take some
t i m e , although several promising leads are
already being explored. For example, t h e
m u l t i n ational pharmaceutical company
Glaxo Wellcome has announced it will
supply pregnant HIV- p o s i t i ve women in
d e veloping countries with AZT at 50 to 70
per cent below the usual pri c e .The reason
for this sudden bu rst of philanthropy is
t h at new outlets must be found for dru g s
t h at no longer work in the deve l o p e d
c o u n t ri e s , and the economies of scale
resulting from the potentially broader
market make the price cut possible. O t h e r
The lengthening list of Aids patients raises the pre s s u re
on the facilities of Nsambya hosital in Kampala, t h e
capital of Uganda. In the countries of the South
g e n e ra l l y, Aids statistics have exploded in recent years.
Region population with HIV/Aids
Sub-Saharan Africa 20.8 millions
North Africa and Middle East 210,000
South and South-East Asia 6.0 million
East Asia and Pacific 440,000
Latin America 1.3 million
Caribbean 310,000
Eastern Europe and Central Asia 50,000
Western Europe 530,000
North America 860,000
Australia & New Zealand 12,000
Total 30.6 millions
Source: Report on the Global HIV/Aids Epidemic,
Geneva,WHO, 1997
p ri vate sources may also be tapped, bu t
e ve ryone knows they will not be enough.
T h at is why the pri o rity is treating pre-
gnant women with HIV, which wo u l d
reduce the number of babies born with
the virus by 40 to 50 per cent. “It wo u l d
be irresponsible to promise treatment for
e ve ryo n e ,” s ays Dr. Coll Seck. “ T h e
i m p o rtant thing is to make a start . T h e
people and organizations that became
i nvo l ved in the fight against Aids early on,
in spite of the social stigma invo l ve d , a s
well as pregnant wo m e n , should be  consi-
dered pri o ri t i e s.”
What about the others? The debate
has come out in the open during the past
few months, but there is hardly any doubt
that many people will still be left out.
“The only humanistic policy that can be
i m a gined in the future,” s ays Mart y -
Lavauzelle, “is to match globalization of
profits with globalization of responsibili-
ties.” Fine words, but for the moment
they are no more than that. ■
Sophie Bessis with Xavier Simon
