F rom Chile,
a $50-million c ro p
They walk on the wa t e r,beating the waves with a “ c o r v o ” , a 10-metre-long pole.They scrape
the rocks with iron knives, then stop to pick up brownish,slippery, floppy things which they
pile in heaps,before returning to the wa t e r, scraping and bending again.For several generations,
the seaweed gatherers have been lords and masters of a place which belongs to no one.Th e y
are regarded as demi-gods, and it is said that when they ride their horses down the streets,
or walk with their arms laden with rolls of dry seaweed,it means that bad weather is on the
way.
On these windswept shores, they gather seaweed in the traditional way, from spring to
autumn, just as the Mapuche Indians did 200 years ago. Near Temuco and Chiloé,in the cen-
tral regions of Chile and in the very heart of Araucana,they gather “cochayuyo”and “luche”
(Durvillaea antarctica and Porphyra),with which they make bread and cakes, or cook with mut-
ton. Further south, near Puerto Montt, they have for over twenty years been gathering “luga
roja carrajinado”, “luga cuchara” (Mazzaela or Iridaea) and “pelillo” (Gracilaria),using diving
suits and breathing tubes which enable them to work underwater for long periods without
oxygen tanks.
When the work is done, the beaches are spread with red and brown seaweed which is
flattened out and left to dry in the sun.The gatherers and their families later carry it away in
rolls or bundles weighing between 40
and 60 kilos, which they sell for a pit-
tance to merchants and dealers. Th e
following day, the gatherer will be back
on his rock jutting out of the wa t e r,
“corvo”in hand to prod the waves.
H o w e v e r, this traditional way of
gathering seaweed is tending to disap-
p e a r, just as seaweed’s economic
importance is growing. It is not only used unprocessed as food but also to make algina, a g a r-
agar and carrageenan,substances which are used in the food,pharmaceutical and cosme-
tics industries, and to solidify cultivation media in bacteriology. The seaweed gatherers are
gradually becoming professional farmers.
Seaweed gathering began in Chile in the 1950s, and during the present decade is yiel-
ding 160,000 tonnes of biomass per year,almost 5 per cent of total world production.The indus-
try employs some 12,000 families.
In 1983 over-farming depleted the natural underwater “ m e a d o w s ”of pelillo, the raw mate-
rial for the production of agar,as a result of which scientists, entrepreneurs and seaweed gathe-
ring co-operatives got together to replant the shoreline. Of the 1,200 meadows currently under
concession,342 are active farming centres, operated along the northern shore by big com-
panies and in the South by co-operatives of traditional gatherers.Eighty-two per cent of the
current pelillo crop is transformed by Chilean factories into agar for export to the United
S t a t e s, Ja p a n , Singapore and Th a i l a n d .The remaining 18 per cent of the seaweed is dried and
exported,mainly to Japan.Total earnings from Chile’s seaweed exports are about $50 mil-
lion.
Pelillo farming has helped to stabilize production and reduce pressure on natural mea-
d o w s ; at the same time, it ensures a constant supply of raw material to the Chilean agar indus-
t r y. C u r r e n t l y, 75 per cent of Chile’s total seaweed crop is being transformed into a high
added value product.The same results are expected in the short term for the red seaweed used
to produce carrageenan.
C. L’H.T. and G. C. ■
The traditional w ay of
gathering sea weed is
tending to disappear just
as sea weed’s economic
importance is growing.
