40 THE UNESCO COURIER
We tend to view the marine world as an
i n finite food supply, a bottomless pit for
waste and a “common space”where we
can play and fig h t , as and when we please.H owe-
ver, this is quickly changing as the world meta-
p h o rically “ s h ri n k s ” , as the oceans no longer pre-
sent the obstacle they once were to travel or
c o m m u n i c ations and as we explore their furt h e s t
depths.We have entered a new era of fierce com-
petition for marine resources and space.
Sixteen of the world’s 23 mega-cities (with
over 2.5 million inhabitants) are on or close to
the sea. In China about 100 million people
have moved from land-locked provinces to new
coastal economic zones since 1990. Coastal
t o u ri s m , f i s h e ries and offshore petroleum
industries are major sources of revenue for
many countries, particularly small developing
island states.
Despite air travel, the oceans are still the
great highways for trade, with ships transpor-
ting 80 per cent of international cargo. Indeed,
the oceans largely make economic globalization
possible by offering a cheap means of moving
commodities around the world. Tens of thou-
sands of vessels are at sea at any one time, all
needing a shore to dock, load, unload and dis-
pose of waste. Until recently the oceans were
the obvious solution for waste disposal in gene-
ral.Whole industries have been built up around
dumping domestic sewage, industrial waste,
decommissioned oil rigs and nuclear waste at
sea.
G ove rnments and their military forces,
multinationals and local industry all have a
major stake in the marine world. So it is not
surprising to find increasing conflict between
and among these actors. Some of the most hea-
ted disputes have occurred in the fisheries sec-
tor. As stocks collapse after decades of overfi-
shing, vessels from different nations are chasing
the remaining fish in a cut-throat competition
that has in some cases escalated into violence.
The North Atlantic “cod wa rs ” b e t we e n
Canadian and Spanish trawlers in the early
1990s have probably attracted the most atten-
tion. In a heated dispute ten years earlier, a
Danish vessel deliberately sailed into UK
waters to catch forbidden fish and face arrest
by the Royal Navy.
In the rivalry for marine resources, environmental
concern should not be seen as just another
competing use of the oceans.
T h reats  

  and confli c t s
Susan Wells and Gordon Shepherd*
The real culprit in all these clashes is the
over-capacity of the world’s fishing fleet, which
grew twice as fast as catches between 1970 and
1990, largely due to huge government subsi-
dies. Artisanal fishermen in developing coun-
tries in West Africa, for example, now find their
resources plundered by “distant-water” fleets
from the European Union which pay scant
regard to the needs of local communities or
ecosystems. The EU now has a network of
fishing access agreements with nineteen
African countries, for which licence fees often
represent a tiny proportion of the value of the
catch. Fishing conflicts have even reached the
World Trade Organization; recently the United
S t ates tried to exclude tuna and shri m p
imports from certain countries using catch
techniques which kill dolphins and sea turtles.
Perhaps the greatest conflict to be resolved
is that between human activities
and healthy seas. The environ-
mental community and its non-
g ove rnmental organizat i o n s
(NGOs) are often seen as sepa-
rate “stakeholders”, interested in
simply preventing anyone from
using the oceans. They are vie-
wed as animal “huggers”, espe-
cially given the attention paid to
sea turtles or whales. And yet, the major role of
most NGOs is to develop ways of ensuring the
long-term health of the planet.
Environmental concern must cease to be
seen as a competing “use” of the oceans, and
be recognized instead as a fundamental com-
ponent of all marine activities. Aside from a few
exceptions like military exercises and shipping ,
human activities which depend on the marine
environment require a healthy ocean. Marine
parks and reserves, for example, may appear to
compete with space for resorts and marinas, yet
they play a vital role in protecting habitats on
which fisheries depend and tourism is based.
Most of the issues covered by the media as
conflicts between opposing camps are really
about basic questions over access to and sustai-
nable use of the ocean, from the public outcry
over French nuclear testing in the South Pacific
to NGO clashes with multinational oil compa-
nies such as Shell over oil spills and the dispo-
sal of rigs on the seabed. A similar “conflict” is
brewing over developing new submarine fossil
fuel sources, which flies in the face of all that
we know about climate change.
In some cases, the damage predicted has
not materialized or the potential impacts have
been impossible to prove. But the concerns are
still valid. We know so little about the oceans
that it would be foolish to take anything other
than a precautionary approach. This is clearly
reflected in the United Nations Law of the Sea
Convention, although it is important to note
that work remains to be done because the
convention ignores a crucial issue of the future:
genetic resources of the high seas.
Yet international agreements and regula-
tions can only go so far. We need to build a
broad public constituency through initiatives
like the International Year of the Ocean. The
momentum is growing. A 1997 poll in the
USA, for example, found that 55 per cent of
A m e ricans believe that ocean
exploration should take prece-
dence over space exploration.
At the same time, e c o n o m i c
dependence on marine resources
opens the way to creating social
and economic incentives for their
sustainable use. Eco-labels on pro-
ducts and services are starting to
make a difference to consumers.
C o m p a n i e s , NGOs and intern ational agencies
are looking into new ways of certifying fis h e ri e s
management and aquaculture, in part i c u l a r.
Moving beyond consumers,we need to shift
the balance of power between all stakeholders
so that coastal communities can reassert their
rights to their marine resources. This is not just
a pipe-dream. In the Pacific, authorities are for-
mally recognizing the traditional structures and
techniques revived by local communities to
manage their marine resources. In Mauritania,
the Imraguen (a fishing community) now have
exclusive fishing rights in the resource-rich
Banc d’Arguin Marine Park.
The time has come to bridge these scattered
i n i t i at i ves by reinforcing intern ational and
regional co-operation. This is not simply a
question of good intentions but a realistic stra-
tegy for resolving the my riad of mari n e
conflicts. The stakeholders have everything to
gain in respecting what may well be the world’s
last wilderness. ■
*World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
The “big 5” use surface craft to
t ransport part of their nuclear
a rsenal and deploy 200 nuclear
submarines in the ocean depths. It would be
foolish to take
any other than a
precautionar y
approach.
