Life must go on
Juan Boggino and Diane Kolnikoff are psychotherapists at a counseling centre run by the Primo Levi
organization in Paris, which helps refugees who have been tortured.Some of them,like the Haitian
woman who has just arrived at the centre, are victims of rape. “She left her country after being
raped in prison,” says Kolnikoff. “She abandoned the child conceived during the rape and came to
live alone in France. Since then,she has given birth to another baby, but still has thoughts of infan-
ticide even though the second child has nothing to do with her past.” Hers is one of many heart-
rending stories, such as that of an African woman who is “always dreaming she has a weight on
top of her that keeps her from moving.”
Even years later, “the suffering never goes away,” says Boggino. It manifests itself as a “deep
breakdown of the individual and feelings of shame and humiliation that are especially strong since
the crime was committed in front of witnesses, the family, the village. Young women who were vir-
gins at the time of the rape say no one will ever want them. It is impossible for them to imagine
having a normal relationship with a man.” Horror gives way to the absurd. These women feel guil-
ty rather than victimized. They cannot accept that “their torturers were the inhuman ones. They
wonder why they survived while others died. They tell themselves their lives were spared because
they let themselves be raped.”
Nightmares, amenorrhoea, repeated illnesses, fear of physical contact and frigidity are the
most common symptoms of their emotional suffering. For these women,silence is suffocating while
speech is golden.It allows them to talk about what happened,to cry, to express their feelings and
their anger. Speaking lets them separate themselves from the torture they went through,explains
Kolnikoff. It allows them to live “with”rape rather than “in”it.After psychotherapy, some of them
manage to feel comfortable with their bodies again,to give and receive pleasure and even to love
the children “born of bad memories,” provided they accept them as their own.
Talking about the rape also makes victims feel they have a right to point a finger of blame at
the culprit,which allows them to shed feelings of guilt and shame. “But these women need to be
believed. That’s where the law and the courts have a decisive role to play.” No cure is possible
unless the rapists are named and brought to trial. S. Bou ■
