Is frugality a
virtue?
BY JAMES GRIFFIN
If not an end in itself, frugality can
lead to a better quality of life
Does frugality have some sort of ethi¬
cal status? Or is it just an optional "life¬
style" admirable in its way, perhaps, but
admirable as lavish life-styles can be too? Is
frugality any more firmly rooted in values
than luxury is?
Or is it, perhaps, valuable only in special
circumstances, when food or clothes or other
goods are in short supply and sparing con¬
sumption is only good sense? Is it a virtue in
the Third World but not in the First? Is it
appropriate in some settings and wildly inap¬
propriate in others?
Well, let us see where frugality might fit
into ethics. It is not a virtue, at least in the
sense that philosophers use that word. It may
be a virtue in a popular, everyday sense: that is,
generally a good thing, a thing to be admired
or praised. I shall come back to that possibil¬
ity in a moment. By a "virtue" philosophers
mean a disposition that will carry one through
typical trying circumstances in life, when,
without the virtue, one's spirit would be either
deficient or in excess.
Temperance is the classic virtue closest to
frugality. A temperate person does not react to
testing circumstances with either too much
heat or too little, too much desire or too little.
Temperance is defined as striking a certain sort
of desirable balance. But what is suspicious
about frugality is, precisely, that it stands res¬
olutely at one extreme: sparing use. But why is
that the right balance? And balance between
what vices? On one side oí sparing use we might
see waste. But what is on the other side ? On the
other side we might see hurtful under¬
consumption. But why should we regard fru¬
gality as the ideal balance between these two
10
evils ? One could go well beyond frugality into
a fairly liberal use of goods without crossing
over into waste. Why is this greater liberality
not the more desirable balance?
Nor, I think, is frugality intrinsically valu¬
able. Imagine, first, a frugal life: I am careful and
sparing in all that I use; I consume enough for
health but no more than is required for me
to meet simple, basic needs. Now imagine a
non-frugal life: I am less vigilant about and
more liberal in what I use; I consume more
than is strictly needed for my basic needs but
I do not waste anything. Now, if one sees each
The cultivation of "deep
personal relations" Is an
aspect of the good life that
societies based on
consumption tend to
relegate to the
background. Above,
Mayan clay figurines (8th-
11th centuries, Campeche,
Mexico).

The quest to understand
metaphysical and moral issues
Is also widely regarded as an
element of the good life. Below,
the Japanese monk-poet
Fujiwara no Nobuzane (ink and
paper, 12th-13th centuries).
of these lives simply as the lives I have just
described and apart from any consequences
that they might have, is there any reason to say
that one is better than the other? I at least can
see no reason to think so.
So if a frugal life is in some way valuable, it
must be because of the things that it leads to.
It must be, not intrinsically valuable, but
instrumentally valuable.
And here, it seems to me, there is an inter¬
esting case. Frugality strikes most modern
people as out of date and that no doubt for
different reasons. It seems appropriate to a life
of scarcity and as the world grows richer, fru¬
gality grows irrelevant. And Freud will have
had something to do with it: we suspect that
behind a frugal exterior there is an unattractive,
anal-retentive interior. But, most of all, our
modern value system seems to have gone over
to a form of consumerism. We are dominated
by an economic model of the quality of life.
A human is seen as a complex of desires. The
quality of a human life is seen as in direct pro¬
portion to the satisfaction of these desires.
The social sciences, and through them the pop¬
ular consciousness, are dominated by this
desire-satisfaction model of value.
But its dominance is now, fortunately,
weakening. The theory is poor. One cannot
equate what makes a person's life good with
what satisfies that person's desires. It is possi¬
ble in fact, all too common for a person's
desires to be satisfied and the person be no
better off. For example, I may desire revenge on
someone indeed it may be the strongest
desire in my life yet find that when I have it
I am no better off, even possibly worse off.
An instrumentforgood
Nothing becomes valuable just by being
desired. Some things in life just are valuable
and others not. That is a strong claim, and a
much disputed one in philosophy, but it
seems to me right. I think that, with experi¬
ence, we can compile a list of the valuable
things in life the things that may not make
absolutely any life better (people are too var¬
ious for that) but that make normal human
lives better. My list would contain at least
these unsurprising things: enjoyment, deep
personal relations, accomplishing something
in the course of one's life, understanding cer¬
tain basic metaphysical and moral matters,
autonomy, and liberty.
Consumerism is not just weak in theory. It
does not work out happily in practice either.

One all too common feature of the life of a
modern consumer is that one set of desires is
satisfied only to be succeeded by a new set,
with no advance in quality of life. These con-
sumerist desires often form a treadmill. One
runs but makes no real advance. When that
happens, it is clear that one has lost sight of
values. What arc really valuable are the things
on the list that I just mentioned. And other
things are valuable, valuable in a secondary,
instrumental way, if they lead to the values
on the list.
This, it seems to me, is where frugality
comes in. It is valuable if, and only if, a frugal
style of life is generally conducive to some of
B the UNESCO Courier January 1998
Above, Virgil meditating on
his poem TheAeneid, flanked
by the muses Clio and
Melpomene. A Roman mosaic
from Tunisia (3rd century
B.C).
the values on the list. There is much to be said
for that. A frugal life avoids the more value-
destroying forms of consumerism. A frugal
life tends to be a simple life, and, though sim¬
plicity in life is not guaranteed to put one in
touch with real values, it substantially increases
the chances that one will be. Many of us, fro m
time to time, have had the experience of living
more simply than we usually do and finding
ourselves, as a result, more in harmony with
what matters in life. Of course, we return to
our everyday life and lose this precious insight.
That is another reason why a frugal life-style
can be valuable. One's style of life not only
can embody values; it can also be the best way

to open one's eyes to values that one would
otherwise be blind to.
That is to say that frugality can, in this
instrumental way, be a personal good. It can
also be a community good. A frugal commu¬
nity can save and invest for a better future.
Frugality can also be a global good indeed, a
little more frugality may be necessary simply
to avoid global disaster. We consume fossil
fuels without serious constraint. We justify
ourselves with the thought that advancing
technology will be sure to come up with sub¬
stitutes for them. But just as good? Without
undesirable side-effects? We do not really
know. And our consumerism pollutes the
atmosphere, producing global warming. We
certainly do not know all the consequences
in store for us from that.
But I must not end with praise of frugality.
My life is better for my living simply on holi¬
days, consuming much less than I normally do.
But then I live in the prosperous part of the
world. I choose simplicity. But millions of peo¬
ple are forced to consume sparingly. They are
destitute. Their lives are not better for it. The big
killer in the world is not war or periodic famine.
It is something undramatic and unreported:
chronic malnutrition. Chronic hunger, some
claim, kills eighteen to twenty million people
annually, which is over twice the number that
died annually in the Second World War. Their
sparing consumption is nothing but evil.
"A frugal life tends to be a
simple life and increases one's
chances of being in touch with
real values." Right, a woman
writing. (Detail from an
Iranian fresco,16th-17th
centuries).
