
Noah Samara — a businessman with
the missionary spirit
Forty-one-year-old Sudanese-Ethiopian businessman Noah Samara spent his childhood in
Ethiopia,a country steeped in mysticism and the place where the idea of African unity took
shape. “The most beautiful childhood memory I have dates back to the early 1960s, when
I was seven. My father took me to the United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa where
the OAU (Organization of African Unity) was
created. Addis Ababa was seething with excite-
ment. Nasser, Nkrumah, Kenyatta, Senghor, all
the giants were there. I remember them planting
trees with Haile Selassie to symbolize African
unity. It’s incredible to think how much hope
there was.”
But then disillusionment set in, and Samara
left Ethiopia to study abroad.“I went to school in
England and the United States and forgot every-
thing.” But he learned new things. “America
taught me not to be afraid of dreams and that
collective will begins with the individual.” To cut
a long story short,living in the United States hel-
ped him ally his desire for personal success with
his childhood dreams. “Doing business is fantas-
tic when you can combine it with doing some-
thing good for society. Many people are convin-
ced that doing good is not compatible with
making money. But I don’t agree.”
Samara had a career with the International
Telecommunications Union before deciding to return to Africa to cure it “of a disease that
is probably more serious than Aids”—the lack of infrastructures that would democratize
access to information. “This situation is unacceptable and has created a vicious circle of
dependence. I feel that an African Renaissance is going to happen and I am convinced that
it will be caused by things like Worldspace. What we want to do is bring about a vertical
globalization of information, affecting not just the elite but going all the way down to
grassroots level. You need a critical mass to make a change. And how do you get a critical
mass? Through mass media.” S. Bou. ■
A s i a We s t
A s i a N o r t h
A s i a S o u t h
A S I A S TA R
© Wo r l d s p a c e,Wa s h i n g t o n
