How do you create an $18 billion company in
just 14 ye a rs? Michael Dell began in 1984 with
a simple business insight. He could bypass the
dealer channel through which personal computers
were then sold. I n s t e a d , he would sell directly to
c u s t o m e rs and build customized products to order.
In one swo o p, Dell eliminated the reseller’s markup
and the costs and risks associated with carry i n g
large inve n t o ries of finished goods. The form u l a
became known as the direct business model, and it
gave Dell a substantial cost advantage.
D e l l ’s product line has expanded over the ye a rs.
In additon to desktop personal computers , the com-
p a ny now sells a broader range of hardwa r e — l a p-
t o p s , s e rve rs , and wo r k s t at i o n s. But make no mis-
t a k e , Dell sells physical t h i n g s, m a n u factured goods
t h at must be assembled and transported and delive-
red and serviced with a staff of about 22,000 wo r l d -
wide and a base in Round Rock,Te x a s. It sounds a lot
like the old, t a n gible economy.
Is Dell, t h e n , stuck in the past of mat e rial goods
and physical flows? Or is it part of the so-called “ n e w
e c o n o my ” ,c r e ating wealth through “ i n t a n gible streams
of dat a , images and symbols”. In fa c t , Dell is both.
Companies have always thri ved by offering cus-
tomers superior value, giving them more for less.
For the most part, they offer better value by shrin-
king the time and the resources consumed in mee-
ting customers ’n e e d s.The fundamental economic
rules of business have n ’t changed. But like many
other companies today, Dell is harnessing the tools
of the knowledge economy — i n f o rm ation and tech-
nology—to bring new levels of efficiency and pro-
ductivity to the old world of tangible goods.
Supplier partnerships
Consider all the activities and resources that go
into making and selling a computer. As a small
s t a rt - u p, Dell simply couldn’t afford to create eve ry
piece of that value chain. Instead, its strategy has
been to build systems from components made by
other companies. Let them invest in R&D and in
factories. For each component, Dell evaluates the
field and picks the best to be its suppliers.
Dell then works so closely with them that they
b e c o m e , in Dell’s wo r d s , “ v i rtually integr at e d ” .
While they remain independent companies, e a c h
free to focus on what it does best,they share infor-
m ation and co-ordinate their activities as if they
were part of one vertically integrated company.


Managing
Dell Computer gains time—and money—by
using technology and information to blur
traditional boundaries between a company
and its customers

The knowledge economy When ideas are capital



velocity Joan Magretta*
Dell’s Internet sales run to 
$6 million a day.Real-time inform ation sharing with suppliers is
the key to just-in-time assembly. Instead of having
suppliers make periodic deliveries to a warehouse,
Dell tells them the exact number of components it
needs, at what hour of the day, delivered to which
loading dock at its fa c t o ry.This is precisely the kind
of information a company would freely share with
an internal supplier.
D e l l ’s rule in working with part n e rs is to have as
few as possible, and to keep them as long as they
maintain their technological and quality leaders h i p.
As Michael Dell notes, “This isn’t like the auto-
mobile bu s i n e s s , where you find a tire supplier that
you will probably stick with foreve r.” Managed this
way, supplier part n e rships gi ve Dell the flexibility to
respond to changes in the market.
Supplier partnerships aren’t new to the know-
ledge economy, nor is just-in-time manufacturing.
However,today’s technology enhances the econo-
mic incentives to collaborat e . Companies can share
design databases and methodologies in ways that
we r e n ’t possible just five to ten ye a rs ago. Doing so
can dramatically speed time to market, thus crea-
ting substantial value which the bu yer and supplier
can share.
Why time is money
“In our industry,” Michael Dell explains, “ i f
you can get people to think about how fast inven-
tory is moving, then you create real value.The key
challenge—and the biggest change from business as
usual—is changing the focus from how much inve n-
tory there is to how fast it’s moving.”
Speed is critical for two reasons. F i rs t , in the
computer business the cost of components goes
down as much as 50 per cent a year.The company
with two or three months of inventory will be at a
significant cost disadvantage to the company with
e l e ven days because its products were built with
more expensive parts. Second,in technology mar-
kets with frequent product transitions, it’s easy to
get stuck holding obsolete inve n t o ry, or to be late to
market with the hottest new products.
C o - o r d i n ation between companies is not new to
the knowledge economy. However, such tight co-
ordination would not be possible without sophisti-
c ated data exchange. M a n a ging velocity is about
m a n a ging inform at i o n , using a constant flow of
i n f o rm ation to dri ve operating practices. In essence,
Dell substitutes information for inventory.
The result is that Dell turns its inve n t o ry ove r
t h i rty times per ye a r , an extraordinary feat gi ven the
complexity of its product line. But without credible
information about what customers are actually
bu y i n g, s ays Dell, “ t rying to manage eleven days of
i nve n t o ry would be insane.We couldn’t do it without
c u s t o m e rs who work with us as part n e rs.”
Forecasting customer needs
Working closely with customers is critical to the
Dell strat e g y.With the direct model, Michael Dell
e x p l a i n s ,“ You actually get to have a relationship with
the customer.And that creates valuable inform at i o n .”
Ninety per cent of Dell’s sales go to institu-
t i o n s — business or gove rnment—and 70 per cent to
very large customers that buy at least $1 million in
PCs a ye a r.With those large customers , Dell main-
tains an on-site team that functions less as a ve n d o r
and more as the customer’s inform ation techno-
logy department for PCs.The team will typically be
involved in planning the customer’s PC needs and
the config u r ation of their netwo r k .Thus Dell’s sales
account managers have unusually good inform a-
tion on what each customer intends to buy.
Smaller customers buy direct from Dell ove r
the telephone. Not only can Dell compile real-time
d ata about what ’s selling, but its salespeople can
also steer customers, while they’re on the phone,
toward product configurations that are available—
further using information to fine-tune the balance
between supply and demand.
In short ,by eliminating the middleman,Dell cap-
tures valuable inform ation from customers—which it
uses to lower its inve n t o ry, its costs, and its ri s k s. I n f o r-
m ation from the customer flows all the way through
m a n u fa c t u ring to Dell’s suppliers , making the whole
an efficient and flexible system. In this way, the direct
model allows Dell to build computers to meet real
demand from real end customers.
B e yond substituting inform ation for inve n t o ry,
Dell combines technology and inform ation to blur
‘I’m only half joking when I say
that the only thing better than the Internet 
would be mental telepathy’

the traditional boundaries that separate a company
from its customers.
Consider technical support . Dell has made it
possible for its customers to access its internal sup-
p o rt tools on-line in the same way as Dell’s ow n
technical support teams do. In effect, Dell is
enabling the customer to service itself, saving time
and money on both sides.
New roles for customers
Dell has done something analogous with its sel-
ling function. It has developed customized Intranet
sites called Premier Pages for well over 400 of its
largest global customers,giving them direct access
to purchasing and technical information.A custo-
mer can allow its thousands of employees to use
the Premier Page as a kind of interactive catalogue
of all the model configurations that the company
a u t h o ri z e s ;e m p l oyees can then price and order the
PC they want. Employees are happy to have some
choice, and Dell and the customer both eliminate
all the paperwork and sales time normally associa-
ted with corporate purchasing.
Beyond Dell’s mechanisms for sales and sup-
p o rt , the company has set up a number of forums to
exchange inform ation with the customer. P l at i n u m
Councils, for example, are regional meetings—in
A s i a - Pa c i fic, Ja p a n , the US, and Europe—of Dell’s
largest customers. In these meetings, Dell’s senior
technologists share their views on where the tech-
nology is heading over the next two ye a rs and listen
to customers talking about their needs. Helping the
customer anticipate the flow of new technology
helps Dell, as well, in thinking about new product
offerings and in forecasting demand.
Most of the managerial challenges at Dell
Computer have to do with speeding the pace of
e ve ry element of its bu s i n e s s. Life cycles are mea-
sured in months, not ye a rs , and companies must
m ove fast to stay in the game. In a world where
customer needs and technologies change quickly,
m a n a g e rs must sense and respond to rapid shifts,
process new inform ation ve ry quickly and make
decisions in real time.
In that context,Internet commerce has been a
l o gical extension of Dell’s direct model. Dell began
selling direct on the Net in 1996.Within the first
year, Dell reached a run rate of $2 million a day, a
figure that has gr own to roughly $6 million a day in
1 9 9 8 . “Because what we ’re all about is shri n k i n g
the time and the resources it takes to meet custo-
m e rs ’n e e d s ,” explains Michael Dell, “I’m only half
joking when I say that the only thing better than
the Internet would be mental telepathy.” ■
