A prisoner's
Statue of blind justice in an
American library. She is
holding a sword and scales,
the symbols of truth and
impartiality.
After long years in gaol
a man becomes a student
and a writer
It is hard to talk about prison
without losing your cool. And if
you do, you risk getting caught up in a
confrontation with the supporters or
opponents of a system that, although
ineffective, seems indispensable.
My reason for testifying publicly
about areas of my life where the scars
have still not healed is that I would
like to help in the search for more sat¬
isfactory and more caring responses to
the problems of delinquency.
I come from what is euphemisti¬
cally known as a working-class back¬
ground, in other words from the
underclass. I was one of seven children,
and we were so poor that none of us
was able to stay on at school beyond
the minimum leaving age. The prospect
of working as a boiler-maker did not
appeal to me at all a wrong direction
that in the circumstances it was diffi¬
cult to correct. The mood of resigna¬
tion that settled in after 1968 put paid
to whatever illusions I still had about
a better and fairer world. In January
1970 I was arrested, with some of my
childhood buddies, for a hold-up
committed with a dummy weapon.
Prison came as a brutal shock. The
appalling physical conditions and to
an even greater extent the prevailing
outlook made me feel I had stepped
back into an age of barbarity. The grim
universe within the prison walls not
only seemed out of touch with the
outside world but to be embedded in
a punitive mentality bordering on bes¬
tiality. I felt utterly isolated from the
prison officers and my fellow inmates.
I also felt cut off from myself, and this
was not the least of the dangers I was
up against. I soon learned what life in
the jungle is all about. If you want to

testimony BY LOUIS PEREGO
survive you can't afford to trust
another living soul.
You start by withdrawing into a
shell. Then, if you don't crack up, you
get tougher, carefully concealing your
slightest weaknesses. You have to think
twice about every move you make. A
misplaced word or glance could lead
to all sorts of trouble. The pressure
was so intense that whatever vague feel¬
ings of remorse I might have had gave
way to a strong sense of injustice.
When you're always on your guard
you suffer physical and psychological
harm that is impossible to measure.
After serving four-and-a-half years of
a six-year sentence, I came out broken
and bent on revenge.
Drawing of a peephole used by
guards to look inside a cell
(France).
I tried to settle down; I became the
father of a little girl. But three years
after my release I was imprisoned for
armed robbery. The 1974 prison riots
had led to a handful of vague reforms.
Inmates were allowed to listen to the
radio, and washbasins and toilets were
installed in some (but not all) cells.
But the mentality had not changed and
arbitrary power still reigned supreme.
I found time to think about the
way my life was going. A spell of soli¬
tary confinement for a breach of disci¬
pline gave me an opportunity to brush
up on what I had learned in school and
pursue my education. I wasn't allowed
to attend the prison school, so I had to
work on my own. This time I served
eight years of a twelve-year sentence
and was released with a Master's in psy-
¡ chology under my belt. I knew things
¿ would be tough, but I had no idea how
| tough.
| Reintegration is a term that should
s be added to the list of empty, mean-
| ingless words. Mysteriously, everyone
| I contacted with a view to a job shied
3 away as if they had been tipped off
I about me. In July 1987, I committed
s another offence and was arrested again.
I wondered for a long time whether
life was worth living but loving sup¬
port from my companion and our
children helped me get back on my feet.
Writing my first book led to my
conditional release after three and half
years of preventive detention. But when
I showed up for a court date eighteen
months later, I was sentenced to twelve
years imprisonment, in other words I
had more than eight years to serve. I still
do not know how I managed to sur¬
vive that additional ordeal. Love and
the confidence a few people showed in
me had, of course, a lot to do with it.
Which just goes to show, whatever
some people may think, it's never too
late to start again. But what a waste.
Looking back, I can't help thinking it
could have been avoided.
