THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION ON THE HUMAN
GENOME AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Preface
The Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, which was adopted unan¬
imously and by acclamation by the General Conference of Unesco at its 29th session on 1 1 Novem¬
ber 1 997, is the first universal instrument in the field of biology. The uncontested merit of this text resides
in the balance it strikes between safeguarding respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the need to ensure freedom of research.
Together with the Declaration, UNESCO's General Conference adopted a resolution for its imple¬
mentation, which commits States to taking appropriate measures to promote the principles set out in
the Declaration and encourage their implementation.
The moral commitment entered into by States in adopting the Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights is a starting point, the beginning of international awareness of the need
for ethical issues to be addressed in science and technology. It is now up to States, through the measures
they decide to adopt, to put the Declaration into practice and thus ensure its continued existence.
Federico Mayor
3 December 1997


THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
ON THE HUMAN GENOME
AND HUMAN RIGHTS
A. HUMAN DIGNITY AND THE HUMAN
GENOME
Article 1
The human genome underlies the fundamental unity of all
members of the human family, as well as the recognition of their
inherent dignity and diversity. Ina symbolic sense, it is the heritage of
humanity.
Article 2
a) Everyone has a right to respect for their dignity and for their
rights regardless of their genetic characteristics.
b) That dignity makes it imperative not to reduce individuals to their
genetic characteristics and to respect their uniqueness and diversity.
Article 3
The human genome, which by its nature evolves, is subject to
mutations. It contains potentialities that are expressed differently
according to each individual's natural and social environment includ¬
ing the individual's state of health, living conditions, nutrition and
education.
Article 4
The human genome in its natural state shall not give rise to finan¬
cial gains.
B. RIGHTS OF THE PERSONS
CONCERNED
Article 5
a) Research, treatment or diagnosis affecting an individual's genome
shall be undertaken only after rigorous and prior assessment of the
potential risks and benefits pertaining thereto and in accordance with
any other requirement of national law.
b) In all cases , the prior, free and informed consent of the person
concerned shall be obtained. If the latter is not in a position to con¬
sent, consent or authorization shall be obtained in the manner pre¬
scribed by law, guided by the person's best interest.
c) The right of each individual to decide whether or not to be
informed of the results of genetic examination and the resulting con¬
sequences should be respected.
d) In the case of research, protocols shall, in addition, be submit¬
ted for prior review in accordance with relevant national and interna¬
tional research standards or guidelines.
c) If according to the law a person docs not have the capacity to con¬
sent, research affecting his or her genome may only be carried out for
his or her direct health benefit, subject to the authorization and the pro¬
tective conditions prescribed by law. Research which docs not have an
expected direct health benefit may only be undertaken by way of
exception, with the utmost restraint, exposing the person only to a
minimal risk and minimal burden and if the research is intended to con¬
tribute to the health benefit of other persons in the same age category
or with the same genetic condition, subject to the conditions pre¬
scribed by law, and provided such research is compatible with the
protection of the individual's human rights.
Article 6
No one shall be subjected to discrimination based on genetic char¬
acteristics that is intended to infringe or has the effect of infringing
human rights, fundamental freedoms and human dignity.
Article 7
Genetic data associated with an identifiable person and stored or
processed for the purposes of research or any other purpose must be
held confidential in the conditions set by law.
Article 8
Every individual shall have the right, according to international and
national law, to just reparation for any damage sustained as a direct and
determining result of an intervention affecting his or her genome.
Article 9
In order to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, lim¬
itations to the principles of consent and confidentiality may only be
prescribed by law, for compelling reasons within the bounds of pub¬
lic international law and the international law of human rights.

C. RESEARCH ON THE HUMAN GENOME
Article 10
No research or research applications concerning the human genome,
in particular in the fields of biology, genetics and medicine, should pre¬
vail over respect for the human rights, fundamental freedoms and human
dignity of individuals or, where applicable, of groups of people.
Article 11
Practices which arc contrary to human dignity, such as reproduc¬
tive cloning of human beings, shall not be permitted. States and com¬
petent international organizations are invited to co-operate in iden¬
tifying such practices and in taking, at national or international level,
the measures necessary to ensure that the principles set out in this
Declaration arc respected.
Article 12
a) Benefits from advances in biology, genetics and medicine, con¬
cerning the human genome, shall be made available to all, with due
regard for the dignity and human rights of each individual.
b) Freedom of research, which is necessary for the progress of
knowledge, is part of freedom of thought. The applications of research,
including applications in biology, genetics and medicine, concerning
the human genome, shall seek to offer relief from suffering and
improve the health of individuals and humankind as a whole.
D. CONDITIONS FOR THE EXERCISE
OF SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITY
Article 13
The responsibilities inherent in the activities of researchers, includ¬
ing mcticulousness, caution, intellectual honesty and integrity in car¬
rying out their research as well as in the presentation and utilization
of their findings, should be the subject of particular attention in the
framework of research on the human genome, because of its ethical and
social implications. Public and private science policy-makers also have
particular responsibilities in this respect.
Article 14
States should take appropriate measures to foster the intellectual
and material conditions favourable to freedom in the conduct of
research on the human genome and to consider the ethical, legal, social
and economic implications of such research, on the basis of the prin¬
ciples set out in this Declaration.
Article 15
States should take appropriate steps to provide the framework
for the free exercise of research on the human genome with due regard
for the principles set out in this Declaration, in order to safeguard
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and human dignity
and to protect public health. They should seek to ensure that research
results arc not used for non-peaceful purposes.
Article 16
States should recognize the value of promoting, at various levels,
as appropriate, the establishment of independent, multidisciplinary
and pluralist ethics committees to assess the ethical, legal and social
issues raised by research on the human genome and its applications.
E. SOLIDARITY AND INTERNATIONAL
CO-OPERATION
Article 17
States should respect and promote the practice of solidarity towards
individuals, families and population groups who are particularly vul¬
nerable to or affected by disease or disability of a genetic character.
They should foster, inter alia, research on the identification, preven¬
tion and treatment of gcnctically-bascd and genetically-influenced
diseases, in particular rare as well as endemic diseases which affect large
numbers of the world's population.
Article 18
States should make every effort, with due and appropriate regard
for the principles set out in this Declaration, to continue fostering the
international dissemination of scientific knowledge concerning the
human genome, human diversity and genetic research and, in that
regard, to foster scientific and cultural co-operation, particularly
between industrialized and developing countries.
Article 19
a) In the framework of international co-operation with develop¬
ing countries, States should seek to encourage measures enabling:
i) assessment of the risks and benefits pertaining to research on the
human genome to be carried out and abuse to be prevented;
ii) the capacity of developing countries to carry out research on
human biology and genetics, taking into consideration their specific
problems, to be developed and strengthened;
iii) developing countries to benefit from the achievements of scientific
and technological research so that their use in favour of economic and
social progress can be to the benefit of all;
iv) the free exchange of scientific knowledge and information in the
areas of biology, genetics and medicine to be promoted.
b) Relevant international organizations should support and promote
the initiatives taken by States for the above-mentioned purposes.
F. PROMOTION OF THE PRINCIPLES SET
OUT IN THE DECLARATION
Article 20
States should take appropriate measures to promote the principles
set out in the Declaration, through education and relevant means,
inter alia through the conduct of research and training in interdisci¬
plinary fields and through the promotion of education in bioethics,
at all levels, in particular for those responsible for science policies.
Article 21
States should take appropriate measures to encourage other forms
of research, training and information dissemination conducive to rais¬
ing the awareness of society and all of its members of their responsibilities
regarding the fundamental issues relating to the defence of human dig¬
nity which may be raised by research in biology, in genetics and in med¬
icine, and its applications. They should also undertake to facilitate on
this subject an open international discussion, ensuring the free expres¬
sion of various socio-cultural, religious and philosophical opinions.
G. IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE DECLARATION
Article 22
States should make every effort to promote the principles set out
in this Declaration and should, by means of all appropriate measures,
promote their implementation.
Article 23
States should take appropriate measures to promote, through
education, training and information dissemination, respect for the
above-mentioned principles and to foster their recognition and effec¬
tive application. States should also encourage exchanges and networks
among independent ethics committees, as they arc established, to fos¬
ter full collaboration.
Article 24
The International Bioethics Committee of Unlsco should con¬
tribute to the dissemination of the principles set out in this Declara¬
tion and to the further examination of issues raised by their applica¬
tions and by the evolution of the technologies in question. It should
organize appropriate consultations with parties concerned, such as
vulnerable groups. It should make recommendations, in accordance
with UNESCO's statutory procedures, addressed to the General Con¬
ference and give advice concerning the follow-up of this Declaration,
in particular regarding the identification of practices that could be
contrary to human dignity, such as gcrm-linc interventions.
Article 25
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any
State, group or person any claim to engage in any activity or to per¬
form any act contrary to human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the principles set out in this Declaration.
