Devil's Marbles, near Alice Springs (Northern Territory), regarded as a sacred site by Australian aborigines. esiamsiasFauiré/Ask images. pans



'For Australian Aborigines,
rock painting is a title to their land'
Tim Fox talks to three Australian Aborigines invited to a Unesco Forum on rock art
rl The Aborigines of Australia have always
J been hunter-gatherers, living in harmony
with their surroundings. They believe that
through ritual they help sustain the cycles of
the natural world and that they are as much a
part of nature as the wind, the rain and the soil.
Understanding nature's secrets is a lifetime
process, completely revealed only to tribal or
clan elders.
Art for the Aborigines is the expression of
present-day life, that is, a life that has been con¬
sidered in the present tense since the beginning
of time. Theirs is both the oldest and the youngest
continuous civilization in the world, the oldest
as attested to by the dating process called ther¬
moluminescence; and the youngest because the
practices depicted by rock paintings are still a
part of Aboriginal culture to this very day.
According to the Aborigines, what is etched
in or painted onto stone is the expression of
the world's immutable laws, which emerged
from the Dream Time, the gelatinous, amor¬
phous time before the world emerged in the
form we know today. These laws were placed
there by ancestors and were until recently only
for the eyes and understanding of a few initi¬
ates, the elders who have demonstrated their
worthiness to know.
In June 1997 three elders and a young dis¬
ciple of the Ngarinyin community left their
native Kimberley Plateau in Australia's remote
northwest and travelled to Europe to exhibit
photographs of their sacred rock drawings and
explain what the drawings meant. By this act,
which not so many years ago would have been
punishable by death, they sought to protect
their access to their sacred sites against pres¬
sure from cattle-grazing, mining companies,
tourists and souvenir hunters.
Without immediate contact with their lands,
the Ngarinyin people cease to exist, for they
are an integral part of the land, and the land Is
an integral partofthem. If they do not actively
maintain the land, the Aborigines believe it will
cease to sustain life just as they will cease to
exist if they are removed from it. This is why
they had asked a painter/film-maker friend,
Jeff Döring, to record on film some of their rock
drawings so that the outside world could learn
of their existence and understand the ways in
which they bind Aborigines to their land.
The role of delegation leader seemed to fall
to David Mowaljarlai, who has perhaps had the
most extensive contact with Westerners through
his many encounters with ethnologists and
anthropologists and the many conferences on
Aborigines he has attended in Australia. Paddy
Wamma is a walking encyclopaedia of the plants
found on the Kimberley Plateau and their medi¬
cinal, practical and nutritional applications. Paddy

Neowarra is president of the Ngarinyin Aboriginal
Corporation and People (N.A.C.) and a firm
believer that traditional law must rule in all
aspects of social life and predominate in decid¬
ing land rights. Even when asked direct ques¬
tions, the youngest of the four, Jason Ninowatt,
deferred to the older men, who answered for
him protectively. The group of four was accom¬
panied by Jeff Döring and anthropologist Tony
Redmond, who often clarified or provided back¬
ground to points made by the Aborigines.
Why this reversal of the age-old practice
of keeping the meaning of the rock
drawings a secret?
David Mowaljarlai: Our paintings are our title
to the land. If we lose our title, the paintings
are empty. It's as simple as that. Besides we
are not revealing all the secrets. Not the most
essential ones. We are grateful to UNESCO for
inviting us to tell our story. We don't normally
travel so far from our land. We are under heavy
pressure from pastoralists, mining companies
and tour operators, who are trying to block us
from our land. They are trying to extinguish our
Native Title.
What Is Native Title?
Tony Redmond: it's a concept initiated by Aus¬
tralia's Northern Territory when it passed the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act in 1976. The Act
gave Aboriginal people inalienable freehold
title to all Aboriginal reserves and a mecha¬
nism by which they could claim vacant Crown
Land. Claimants have to be able to demonstrate
traditional ownership of the land, and claims
are heard by an Aboriginal Land Commissioner.
Theoretically, Aboriginal landowners are able to
limit incursion onto their land for mineral explo¬
ration or commercial development. But it is
proving very hard to enforce.
D.M.: And some peoplemining companies,
pastoralists and the likeare still trying to
deny us our rights by saying we can't prove that
we are the traditional owners of the land. But
we can. There are the rock drawings.
What do the rock drawings prove?
Jeff Döring: Rock art is a visual document. It is
the "written" law in Aboriginal terms. The infor¬
mation in the drawings and the stone arrange¬
ment are totally explicit. White man's law
changes from year to year, but these drawings
never change. The illustration of one man pass¬
ing an object to another, for example, is never
modified, and it has been there, as far as the
Aborigines are concerned, forever. And for the
Aborigines it has the force of law.
Well what, for example, does the
drawing of a man passing an object to
another man mean?
D.M.: Wunan, the act of sharing.
P. W.: The wunan law works for everybody.
Everything has always been shared by every¬
body. No one lives outside the chain. Every¬
one me, everyoneIs inside wunan. Ani¬
mals, things, birds, everything, are all part of
the wunan law.
It all started at the stone wunan table. It's
the stone table that guides us. All our people
Dating of various examples of rock art in
Australia confirms that some of them are over
20,000 years old. Below, a decorated cave at Keep
River, near Kununura, Northern Territory. Right,
detail of drawings on the cave roof.
gathered here to set rules and make laws. All
the clans came from the four corners of the
region to establish the wunan law. They talked
and agreed how the land should be shared out
and where the sacred places should be. All the
men of the wunan law formed a line. No one
was left out. We divided up the land. No one
was left out; no one forgotten.
They made a big cake with the fruit of the
gulangi. "We have to create a rule and establish
a law," they said. "It is our life, this tree before
us." They ate the cake piece by piece. There
was enough for everyone. But the emu grew
impatient for his share. He waited on the crest
of the hill until he felt he'd waited long enough.
Then he came down to get a piece. "No," they
said, "you come from the rising sun. You've got
a long time to wait yet for your share." So he
shouted and stole the cake. They tried to talk
him out of taking the cake, but he would not be
swayed and ran away.
The emu ran faster than any other animal.
The ground shook as he ran. All the birds tried
to catch him, but he was too fast. So they went
to the wowara, pigeons with bronze-coloured
wings. "You are fast runners," they said. "You
are the only ones who can catch the emu." Just
then the wowara were honing the tips of their
spears. They agreed and set out after the emu.
They followed his tracks and finally caught up
with him. He was punished because he had
transgressed the law, as are all those today
who follow in his footsteps. If you look up at
the Milky Way you can see him looking back
over his shoulder at the spear sticking in his
back which he can never pull out because his
arm is too short.
