commentary Federico Mayor
or a broader
In our rapidly changing world, literacy should
be seen as an important evolutionary variable in
every society. For the further a society progresses, the
more it needs to adjust and adapt to new demands and
pressures, so that literacy is a lifelong necessity for all.
Literacy, in the broad sense, is the foundation for life
skills, ranging from basic oral and written communi¬
cation to the ability to solve scientific and social prob¬
lems. Today it involves much more than the acquisition
of the 3Rs and a limited set of traditional skills. It is
linked with the changing demands of life in a given
socio-cultural context.
This means that local communities should be fully
involved in defining the content of literacy progammes.
The local dimension of literacy is extremely important,
not only for accommodating the real needs of learners,
but also for taking into account the linguistic and cul¬
tural realities of multicultural societies. For in the
end, only the learners actually decide what they need
to learn.
Building bridges between cultures
I am very pleased to see that this broader, more dynamic
and culturally sensitive stance is accepted by most
literacy specialists. It marks a long overdue acknowl¬
edgment of the positive role that local languages and
cultures can play in removing some of the serious ped-
40
agogical and psychological hurdles often encountered
by learners. It is the only way to ensure the relevance
and authenticity of literacy work.
I should like to insist here on the importance of
multilingual education. Today education is as much
about learning to live together as learning to know, to
do and to be. Yet we cannot live together if our possi¬
bilities of expression are limited to a single linguistic
frame. This is often at the root of problems encountered
in multicultural societies. Of course, inequality in all
its forms is a major factor. But internal conflicts often
have purely cultural causes. It is more difficult for peo¬
ple to forge links with each other when they cannot
communicate linguistically.
Yet children learn languages easily much more
so than the adults who take the decisions. We need to
take much greater advantage of this fact. Children are
expected to store too much information in their "hard
memory" much of it frankly useless! Giving them
language skills provides them with bridges between
cultures, enabling them to grow up without the debil¬
itating sense that other cultures are alien. It is UNESCO's
task to try to ensure that education at all levels, and
particularly basic education, promotes multilingualism.
And we must invest in such education, since to do so
is to invest in peace.
It is also important to remind ourselves that literacy

'If we truly believe in lifelong learning, and if we seriously
believe in redressing the balance of learning in our societies,
then we should seek to develop in every country an open and more
enabling system of education/
approach to education
is not a neutral process which can be applied in all sit¬
uations, all the time, regardless of social and economic
realities. Such a narrow concept of literacy ignores its
critical role as a tool of empowerment. The Brazilian
educator Paulo Freiré compared to banking those
methods that treat adult learners as empty vessels
waiting to be filled with predetermined bodies of knowl¬
edge disconnected from their social experience. Liter¬
acy must provide space for intellectual development,
motivations for learning and a sense of self-esteem, if
it is to be a genuine education for empowerment.
Bringing adult education into
the mainstream
Many individuals and families around the world are fac¬
ing unexpected changes in the pattern of their daily
lives, disrupting their plans for the future. The
demands on educational services are increasing dra¬
matically, especially in countries where the state is
the main provider of education for children and adults.
In today's world, we cannot afford a short-sighted
approach which, in effect, excludes adult education
from the mainstream of the education system, even
after the concept of lifelong learning has been accepted
as a framework for educational policy.
Literacy programmes must be given the priority they
deserve. Lifelong learning for all requires quality adult
education and literacy programmes with qualified per¬
sonnel, relevant teaching programmes, appropriate post-
literacy materials and decent facilities. We must ask
ourselves whether we really are prepared to make the
necessary investments in adult education and literacy
to ensure universal access to the types of programmes
needed to reach the targets of education for all.
If we truly believe in lifelong learning, and if we
seriously believe in redressing the balance of learning
in our societies, then we should seek to develop in
every country an open and more enabling system of
education, breaking with past concepts of education as
something which happens to people between the ages
of six and twenty and which only the privileged few
were entitled to. Synergy has to be created between for¬
mal and non-formal education programmes.
A case in point is the family literacy concept. We all
know that the continuing education of parents, par¬
ticularly when they are illiterate or under-educated,
can contribute very effectively to their children's suc¬
cess in school. In fact, the family literacy approach is
one of the most effective ways of breaking the cycle of
inter-generational illiteracy. Education and training
policies should include all types of learning, whether
it takes place in a school, in the workplace or at home.
There should be more innovation and creativity in
using different methods and approaches.
