J. Guichard/Sygma, Pans



> Energy: a fair deal for all
BYJEANAUDOUZE
Both the supply of energy and the
demand for it have spiralled in modern
societies, where everyday life and changes to the
environment, global as well as local, are con¬
ditioned by energy production and use. At
the same time, there are more than a billion
people in the world with an income of less
than a dollar a day, and more than two bil¬
lion rely on firewood as their sole source if
any of energy. There is a crying need for a
fairer share-out of material goods, energy and
economic resources.
Energy comes in three forms: so-called
"fossil" fuels (coal, oil and natural gas); nuclear
power; and "renewable" energies (hydroelec
tric power, thermal or photovoltaic solar
energy, wind and tide power, wood, etc.). Each
of these has its own undeniable advantages
and drawbacks.
Fossilfuels
Fossil fuels are abundant and very simple to
use. Oil, for example, can be very easily trans¬
ported and processed, and is relatively cheap.
The technology for producing its many deriv¬
atives is highly developed. What's more, it is
particularly well suited for use in all forms of
land, sea and air transport. Its handy fluid
form and its price make it appropriate to the

I.
&S*$E
World energy resources are inequitably distributed.
The author of a Unesco report on the ethics of energy suggests
ways of righting the balance.
I
"-^J
Above, White Cliffs solar
power plant, New South Wales
(Australia).
Right, gathering firewood near
Lake Abaya in southwestern
Ethiopia.
1 TOE or "tonne oil
equivalent" is the energy
supplied by the combustion
of one tonne of oil. G stands
for giga = one billion, 109.
needs of poor communities or those that are


unable to invest in capital goods.
Fossil fuels account at present for 77 per
cent of all the energy produced and will,
according to the most realistic projections,
still account for 73 per cent in 2020. Worldwide
annual consumption of coal, natural gas and
oil stands, respectively, at 2.3, 1.7 and 2.7
GTOE.1 Proven reserves at 1990 consumption
levels stand at 200 years for coal, 40 for oil and
60 for natural gas. These figures may be mul¬
tiplied by between two and five if improve¬
ments in productivity and efficiency and the
exploitation of the last remaining deposits,
such as those of oil shales, are taken into
account. The resources will be strictly limited
geographically as well as in duration, being
restricted to certain regions such as the Gulf
and the Caspian Sea. This state of affairs is
fraught with the risk of tensions and even
conflicts, owing to the strategic importance
of energy supplies.
Fossil fuels are, furthermore, responsible
for the man-made increase in the carbon diox¬
ide content of the earth's atmosphere, with the
associated danger of an increase in the green¬
house effect and, as a direct result, global warm¬
ing of the order of Io to 4° C in the next twenty
years, which would adversely affect the climate
and the environment. Though much uncer¬
tainty remains as to the scale of these effects, the
risk is great enough to mean that every effort
should be made to slow down the increasing
"carbonization" of the atmosphere due to the
intensive use of fossil fuels.
Nuclearpower
The main advantage of nuclear power is that it
has no effect on the carbon dioxide content of
the atmosphere. As it is also cheaper (per
energy unit) than hydroelectric or thermal
energy, some countries, France for instance,
have opted strongly for this way of produc¬
ing electricity.
THE UNESCO ^>UR1ER MAY 1998 *

Nuclear power is, however, far from being
unanimously accepted. Public opinion is very
conscious of the lack of candid information
and of the safety of nuclear plants, two aspects
that have not always been treated, in some coun¬
tries, with all the necessary care and clarity by
the authorities and the operators. The public is
also worried about the disposal of long-lasting
radioactive wastes, an acute problem to which
the experts seem confident that a long-term
solution can be found. It would also be a mis¬
take to underestimate the danger of the spread
of nuclear arms, even though the main powers
are now significantly reducing their arsenals of
these weapons. A final point is that only those
countries which can afford to make the huge
investments required can put nuclear plants
into operation. The investment is offset by the
low cost of the fuel but is recouped only in
the medium and long term.
Renewable energy sources
The ecological movements, which arc worried
both by global warming and by the real or imag¬
ined dangers of nuclear power, would like renew¬
able energy sources to be developed faster than
is now the case. These forms of energy at present
supply some 1 8 per cent of total demand, which
puts them well ahead of nuclear power.
Technology is moving rapidly forward in
this field. Thanks to technical improvements,
the price of energy produced by photovoltaic
cells, for instance, is due to fall from $5 per
kilowatt-hour in 1990 to $0.5-0.8 by 2010.
These forms of energy arc capable of meet¬
ing the needs of communities that it would be
too expensive to connect to a central grid sup¬
ply, but despite improved productivity and
falling costs, they remain on the whole dearer
than the two previous forms. It will be a long
time before they can constitute the main
source of supply. Other problems that remain
to be solved include the major investments
required for hydroelectric power stations and
the environmental damage caused by the build¬
ing of dams and wind farms.
We must face the fact that as of now there
is no "miracle" energy that is risk-free for
humans and their environment and is also
cheap and inexhaustible. There is no such thing
as absolute security as regards power generation
and use, and it will not be possible in the
future to do without any of the above-men-
Making batteries for electric
cars in Bordeaux (France).

tioned sources. Energy demand will continue
to grow as a result of irreversible technologi¬
cal advances, of the justified demands of the
non-industrialized countries, and of popula¬
tion growth that is in any case set to continue
for at least the next fifty years.
Demonstrators protest
against the shipment of
nuclear waste to Gorleben
(Germany) in 1997.
Some ethicalprinciples
A number of imperatives must thus be borne
in mind by every individual, every nation and,
in particular, the citizens of the industrialized
countries. These are: the right of each indi¬
vidual to sufficient sources of energy; our
responsibility towards our children and our
children's children; protection of the envi¬
ronment; prevention of the potential major
risks from the production of energy on a mas¬
sive scale; the control of costs and the need to
carry on with research in all these fields.
Some of these obligations those relating to
population growth, climate change or the dis¬
posal of nuclear wastes, for example are of a
very long-term nature, while others efforts to
deal with pollution caused by road transport or
chemical waste disposal are short-term. These
differences of time-scale and the various possi¬
ble interactions between the quantitative and
qualitative aspects of the question have to be
taken into account in observations of an ethi¬
cal character such as the following:
*~ The present situation, whereby nearly one
person in four in the world is without access
to the energy resources he or she requires, can¬
not be accepted with resignation. Those with
an active role in world energy policy deci¬
sion-makers, industrialists, research workers
and so forth must ultimately ensure that
there exist, and continue to exist, sufficient
resources of sufficiently cheap energy for all
countries to have access to them, regardless of
their geographical or economic situation. It is
accordingly essential that genuine co-opera¬
tion in energy matters be established on a
sound basis between the countries of North
and South.
*" There should be no pretext for unnecessar¬
ily keeping the countries of the South, which
u rgently need proper infrastructures, on short
commons as regards energy use. This is one
area where, more than in any other, people

A solar dryer in Ghana.
need to be informed, so that they can take part
in discussion and decision-making on subjects
where scientific and technological knowledge is
essential.
*" Our duty to future generations enjoins us
to use energy resources as sparingly and ratio¬
nally as possible, especially as wc know that a
major part of these resources may be exhausted
in a century or two. Wc must also take collec¬
tive action to avoid creating irreversible situ¬
ations with regard to the environment and
energy management. We must take particular
care to apply the "precautionary principle" so
as to avoid causing too great an increase in
atmospheric carbon dioxide, to be careful and
economical in our output and use of energy,
and to do all we can to prevent any event with
irreparable consequences from occurring.
Even though rapid progress is being made in
the exploration of space, wc must acknowledge
the obvious fact that we have only one Earth and
must therefore preserve and protect it. Since
energy production and use may jeopardize our
environment, there is an urgent need for appro¬
priate measures to be taken as rapidly and as
effectively as possible. The management of
nuclear waste and campaigns to combat all forms
of pollution arising from energy use constitute
unconditional obligations in this connection.
*~ Whenever massive quantities of nuclear or
other forms of energy are produced or trans¬
ported, e.g. when oil is transported by sea or
big dams arc built, major risks to life and
health ensue. Absolute safety is unattainable,
but the various energy authorities arc never¬
theless under an obligation to issue and enforce
appropriate safety regulations. These precau¬
tions should be applied to the two risk situ¬
ations just mentioned and should also cover
everyone working in the power-generating
industry, especially those employed at nuclear
and major hydroelectric plants.
Unit cost will continue to be the main fac¬
tor influencing the choice between different
forms of energy. Production costs must be
controlled and savings constantly sought if
energy supplies are to be available to all. In the
case of nuclear power, the costs arising from
safety procedures and the decommissioning
of plants should be taken into account.
*~ Research sometimes seems to have been
neglected in work on energy production and
consumption, but it is an indispensable duty.
Efforts to find new sources of energy and

more economical ways of using it must con¬
tinue. One example is the use of natural gas,
which is in itself a vast field for research. Other
priority areas for research include technolo¬
gies for producing nuclear power fast breeder
reactors, energy-boosting systems, ther¬
monuclear plants, etc. and waste disposal
systems. Efforts must also be made to reduce
the cost of renewables. The industrialized
countries must give effective support to
research in the developing countries and show
them how to maintain their energy facilities.
Further recommendations
We must keep our eyes open for the early
warning signs of potentially dangerous or irre¬
versible situations, and react quickly to them.
Application of the "precautionary princi¬
ple" remains an unconditional obligation. Wc
must take economic and fiscal measures
designed to avert the risks of tension between
producers and consumers and to encourage
proper control of the resource in question.
The tax instrument should be used to rcdis-
Indigenous people of the
Amazon at the 1992 United
Nations Conference on
Environment and Development
in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).
tribute resources between privileged and less
privileged groups of the population.
The man and woman in the street and their
elected representatives must be informed about
everything relating to the production and con¬
sumption of every kind of energy. Parliaments
should have their own scientific and techno¬
logical evaluation services, as is the case in certain
countries such as France. Projections made on the
basis of different economic and demographic
hypotheses ought to be regularly updated.
Last but not least, systems must be created
to enable internationally enforceable measures to
be taken. The environmental balance sheet drawn
up by the United Nations five years after the Rio
Summit was, inevitably, an admission of failure
and reflected the deep disappointment aroused
by governments' inability to engage in dialogue
and undertake joint action.
Now it is realized that no form of energy
can replace any other form, we must endeav¬
our to preserve the balance between producers
and consumers, between rich and poor coun¬
tries, and between those that are spendthrift
and those that arc thrifty.
lííf
