music from
South African traditional popular music has ta ken the international music scene by storm
These days South African music is known all
over the world. It emerged on the interna¬
tional scene at the end of the 1960s with Myriam
Makeba and Hugh Masakela and really took off
after apartheid was abolished.
Now we have the wonderful sounds of Joseph
Shabalala's a cappella Ladysmith Black Mambazo
group, Mahlathini and the vivacious Mahotella
Queens, the lively jazz of Dollar Brand, Chris
McGregor, Dudu Pukwana, Jonas Gwangwa and
Bheki Mseleku, as well as the dynamic multiracial
group Juluka, led by Johnny Clegg and Sipho
Mchunu.
Influenced by gospel and soul music, the
ancient indigenous choral traditions especially
among the Zulu and the Xhosa developed rich
vocal harmonies which are the basis of the coun¬
try's modern popular music.
The black townships artificial ghettos swollen
by migrants from the countryside who were forcibly
resettled under apartheid are especially fertile
ground for musicians. Soweto, for example, is one
of the most lively musical centres in the country,
where the mbaqanga, a combination of South
African rhythms, jazz, soul and old European tunes,
with a throbbing bass sound, is still very popular.
The Africa Cultural Centre
Last summer, the Musiques de Nuit festival in
France invited nineteen young musicians, dancers
and artists from Johannesburg's Africa Cultural
Centre to come and run workshops for teenagers
in various suburbs of Bordeaux. They also orga¬
nized discussion groups on philosophical and
humanistic subjects.
The Centre, a lively cultural spot and symbol
of liberated Africa, was founded in the 1980s in the
west Johannesburg suburb of Newton Bay by
Benjy Francis, a man of the theatre who was born
in a Durban township in the year apartheid was offi¬
cially introduced. Since the end of the 1970s, he
has been the standard-bearer of rebellious black
culture, along with others like the producer Bar¬
ney Simon. After the Soweto massacre of 1976,
Francis decided "to give the struggle another
dimension with new cultural projects."
With limited resources, he founded the Mar
ket Theatre, which started out in the street before
becoming what is now the Centre a few years later.
It was shut down several times by the authorities,
but survived thanks to the perseverance of Fran¬
cis and to funding by progressive organizations.
Its repertoire was then expanded to include other
disciplines and several artists gave their time freely.
In 1980, Francis opened an artists' centre to
encourage exchanges between various forms of
expression, and the Africa Cultural Centre grew
out of this initiative. A repertoire of South African
plays was put together, notably Duzaka's Night of
the Long Wake.
The Centre is well known in Johannesburg but
also organizes courses and workshops in other
towns, teaching music, dance (traditional and hip-
hop), percussion, drama and the plastic arts. The
aim, says Francis, a colourful figure with a beard
and a beret, is "to channel young people's energies
towards artistic expression which can free them. We
are offering our approach and we are ready to
learn as well. We don't close our doors, we don't
commercialize and we don't downsize our dreams."
Citing the example of Nelson Mandela, Francis
opts for dialogue rather than confrontation, for
tolerance and openness rather than revenge and
hostility. Two years ago, the Centre staged Africus,
the continent's first biennial modern art exhibi¬
tion, on the theme of "Let's decolonize our Minds".
In 1994, the Centre opened its Children's
Museum, which will soon have a scientific section
and a library. The Centre has also welcomed per¬
formers such as Whitney Houston and organized a
children's parade ("Heal Humanity") aimed at
encouraging young people's creativity. Francis is
likewise planning to launch a social awareness
project, to look at problems like battered children,
poverty, hunger and teenage pregnancy.
Last autumn, the Cité de la Musique in Paris
welcomed some other South African musicians,
who also displayed the country's cultural rich¬
ness and diversity. They included the Nzalabantu
Choir, a physically striking group of traditional
female singers from Kwazulu Natal who usually
perform at initiation rites, marriages and village
festivals. There was also the diva Sibongile Khu-
malo, who comes from the same part of the coun-

BY ISABELLE LEYMARIE
try but grew up in Soweto. Accompanied by a The Nzalabantu
r -iii . women's choir from
quartet featuring the talented young jazz pianist Kwazu|u Nata|
Moses Mololekwa, she sings from a repertoire which (South Africa).
blends the lyrical with traditional Zulu chants.
There was also a troupe of ingoma dancers (the
Lamontville Group) and the Shukuma Black Mam-
bazo All Star Flutes.
Choirs, dances and penny whistles
On Sundays, ingoma, a collection of dances that
takes its name from a drum, is put on by Zulu min¬
ers living in the mine hostels. The songs and
dances, which hark back to those of ancestral war¬
riors and are warlike and initiatory, are performed
to the accompaniment of a large drum made of a
double cowhide stretched over a metal oil drum.
Lamontville, after the name of a Durban town¬
ship, is a group of young dancers who keep alive
the famous gumboot dance beloved of Zulu work
ers during their leisure lime. The dancers wear
rubber boots adorned with tinkling bottle caps
which they slap with their hands. The rhythm of the
steps, the hand-slapping and the shouts and exhor¬
tations of the group's leader are the only musical
accompaniment.
The Shukuma Black Mambazo All-Star Flutes,
which blossomed in the Johannesburg township
of Alexandra between 1956 and 1963, came
together again specially for the Paris concert. With
acoustic guitars and penny whistles, they recréale
the sound of the kivela groups. Kivela! in Zulu
means "scram!" and is used to warn that the police
are coming. This musical style, popular in the
1910s and 1950s, is a street version of township
jazz. It has gathered other instruments along the
way, such as the saxophone, electric guitar, bass
and piano, and influenced many performers,
including Myriam Makcba. I
_G	_4
