commentary Federico Mayor
Africa and
the world
"Universal peace will one day come about not because
human beings will become better (that is too much to hope
for), but because a new order of things, new science and
new economic needs will force peace upon us". These
prophetic words were written by Anatole France. This new
order of things and the new science and new economic
needs he announced have now come to pass. If war is still
raging in many corners of the earth, it is because most peo¬
ple have not yet grasped this changing situation.
It might have been thought that the end of the cold war
would have liberated resources from which development
and peace would have benefitted. However, such transfers
have been few. It might have been thought that the glob¬
alization of communication, which has turned the planet
into a single community a village, it is said would have
broadened the sense of unity and, by abolishing distance,
would have ipso facto created global solidarity. Nothing
could be further from the truth.
Paradoxically, peace has never been more threatened
than it is at present. The reshaping of geo-strategic interests
and the emergence of new, less tangible types of risk have
given rise everywhere to a wait-and-see attitude, and indeed
to mistrust and withdrawal. As interdependence increases
and extends beyond economics and finance to include social
life and the environment, new divisions are appearing
both between states and within national communities.
Poverty and exclusion are growing. Rather than broaden¬
ing our horizons, the change in our relationship with things
both far and near either makes us lose all our bearings or
else withdraw dangerously into ourselves. What Bill Gates
blithely calls "friction-free capitalism" is clearly liable to
increase marginalization and inequality.
36
I am not blaming the process of globalization, which in
many respects liberalizes and even liberates, and forges
new ties. Globalization is neither good nor bad. It is what the
human community makes of it further proof that good for¬
tune smiles on the rich, the selfish and the cynical, or else
a sign that justice, dignity and solidarity have not entirely
disappeared from the face of the earth. It can be a great
opportunity or a great danger. Like knowledge, it is neutral
by nature and takes on meaning and value from the way it
is used.
There is only one world, yet there are so many differ¬
ences, such lack of symmetry, so many contrasts. The gap
between rich and poor in this "smaller" world is constantly
widening. In what we coyly describe as the "least developed
countries", and especially in Africa, poverty is growing
worse. Their share of world trade is still tiny. In some cases,
economic marginalization goes hand-in-hand with social dis¬
integration, spiralling violence and increases in armed con¬
flicts, and sometimes countries lapse into fraudulent prac¬
tices. Other countries, on the other hand, have developed
political and economic capacities which open up new pos¬
sibilities in their relations with foreign partners.
There are therefore countless situations and very dif¬
ferent levels of development. However, the economies of the
developing countries, where three-quarters of the world's
population live, account for less than 10 per cent of gross
world product. Africa which is certainly not lacking in
resources accounts for less than 3 per cent of this gross
product and its share of world trade is less than 2 per cent.
The international economic context accordingly continues
to be characterized by enormous disparities that are fraught
with risk and conflict. These disparities seem to grow even
THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUARY I 99S

worse within countries themselves, contributing to an The crisis which the continent is currently going through
increase in the risks of social upheaval and threatening the is also, to a significant degree, institutional. Macro-eco-
stability of a large number of African countries . nomic stabilization , no matter how necessary it may be , will

.. . , .. , , , always be inadequate ifit is not accompanied by a strength-
Afnca: globalization s forgotten continent? ening of the African state IIow is it possible for an effective
The study of recent developments and the extrapolation and pro-active state, playing a key role in the necessary
of trends in several fields do not encourage optimism. From reforms, to emerge in order to ensure that economic devel-
the standpoint of the balance between population and opment will be in harmony with a country's society and
resources, the situation in tropical Africa is disastrous as far culture? In fact, in many cases, it lies with societies and
as the immediate future is concerned, since population cultures in the plural, since colonially-created divisions
growth will remain high for several decades, while a large of territories have been instrumental in causing the cultural
proportion of the region's
lateritic soil is irretrievably
exhausted and rules out
any increase in agricultural
production.
In spite of striking exam¬
ples to the contrary like that
of South Africa, as far as
civil peace is concerned, we
know what the situation is in
Algeria, in the Great Lakes
region and in other regions
where there are a host of
latent or low-intensity con¬
flicts. What are sometimes
known as the "new African
dominoes" remain largely
The progress of
'African democratization'
is uneven
fragmentation that is com¬
mon in Africa.
IIow can a state under
the rule of law be encour¬
aged and supported so as to
create the conditions for
development, for the reduc¬
tion of inequality and the
rolling-back of poverty? It
can be done by placing more
emphasis on the institutional
aspect of co-operation and
by strengthening political
relations between the rich
countries and Africa. The
failure of structural adjust¬
ment policies will at least
unpredictable, at least to the outside observer puzzled by the have confirmed one thing: that far from general solutions
lo"ic ofAfrican wars. presented as recipes or panaceas, it is necessary to know,
The picture as regards democracy is mixed. It is true analyse and understand the specific individual paths taken
that the on-going democratic reforms give the impression by the African countries. Even in instances where some
that the process is irreversible. Since 1990, more than countries in the same cultural region may appear to have
twenty African countries have held free elections. This is features in common, each nation, perhaps more so than in
enormous progress compared with the early decades fol¬
lowing independence. But the progress of "African democ¬
ratization" is uneven and the results are varied. What is
more, democracy is a culture in itself, which cannot be
Europe, has its own history, traditions, myths, demons and
strong points, in short its specific characteristics.
If these specific features are not taken into account, if
the law of the market alone continues to rule, if liberalism
improvised or expected to take root after only a few years. is not accompanied by any social concern, how will Africa
In a region like Africa, the demise of traditional social sys- find the resources and mobilize the energy that will enable
terns and the weakening of religious authority can, even with it to be integrated harmoniously and with dignity into the
the best of intentions, leave the door open to the most neg- world scene?
ative aspects of tribalism and dictatorship. (To be continued)
he unesco Courier February i
