From zero
towards one
INTERVIEW WITH SHIOUN MICHIKO NAKASATO
s,
Are the drawings shown here inspired by
calligraphy, like most of your works?
Michiko Nakasato: Yes. In calligraphy you try
to express yourself simply with lines and dots
using two colours, black and white. White
signifies space, which changes its features
according to what you write on the sheet. It
could be spring or autumn, for example,
depending on what the artist wants. When
you make the first stroke on a white sheet of
paper, you should imagine doing it on the
ocean. This first stroke is very important. You
are making a mark on a vast space where there
is nothing, and with this stroke the whole
space becomes alive too. I thought of this when
I did these drawings.
What does the word 'frugality' signify to you?
M. N.: I associate the notion of frugality with
the presence of a sti'ong individuality. It is not
something imposed by others. It is a deter¬
mination to return to a life in which there arc
only essential elements. Of course these ele¬
ments differ from one person to another. Each
person's choice must be respected.
What do you mean by the title 'From zero
towards one'?

la lb le
M. N.: I have always looked upon the number
one as something extraordinary. Zero is the
state where there is nothing. With the arrival of
one, there is a birth. The distance between zero
and one is not measurable. One is also differ¬
ent from other numbers in the sense that it is
the only number we can call single; all the oth¬
ers (except for 0) are plural. In today's world
there is too much esteem for quantity and a
neglect of the individual.
Could you explain the drawings to us?
M. N.: In the first set there is nothing at first.
Then a stroke appears, and suddenly the space
becomes alive. Then a second stroke arrives.
This time there is an encounter. The notion
of distance is created and the two strokes com¬
municate with each other.
The process in the second set is similar, but
the impression it gives is very different. The
first stroke is powerful, and as the second
stroke crosses the first, there is a sort of shock.
The communication here is more violent; you
feel a vibration in the space.
In the last set, another type of space is cre¬
ated. There is tranquillity. Even when the second
one touches the first and new spaces are created
here and there, the atmosphere remains calm.
I am not trying to say here what is right or
wrong. I am just trying to show how space
can be influenced by the movement of an indi¬
vidual. To me one plus one is not two, it is an
encounter of one individual with another.
-
Interview by IVIiki Nozawa 2b

I
I
I
3a
I
í
/
3b
