Rock art of sub-Saharan Africa:
a thumbnail guide BYOSAGAODAK
Men running at full speed.
Rock painting in the Matopo
Hills (Zimbabwe).
Africa has a vast heritage of rock art
which three main factors have helped to
preserve: belief systems, inaccessibility, and
secrecy.
The sites arc generally located in highlands
and comprise rock shelters, caves and smooth
open rock surfaces. Most of the shelters with
paintings are high on bush-covered hillsides,
facing or overlooking plains, valleys or rivers.
The painters seem to have preferred such loca¬
tions because they commanded a wide view
of the plains and of immediate surrounding
areas which enabled them to watch game and
sometimes, perhaps, hostile warring peoples.
Hilltops were also suitable for camping, espe¬
cially during the wet seasons, when the low
lying plains would be flooded.
Most sites were accessible only to special
groups of people at particular times, and there
were strict taboos against visiting, cutting
trees, herding or even collecting firewood from
them. As a result their environment was left

undisturbed. Most sites were inaccessible to
villagers, and people who did manage to reach
them were deterred by taboos from vandaliz¬
ing the art. Most important of all, some sites
were usually known only to elders and prac¬
titioners of rituals, who tried to keep their
location secret.
Unfortunately, the situation has drasti¬
cally changed. Belief systems that guarded the
sites have broken down and are no longer
respected. Population growth has stepped up
demands on land for agricultural use, and since
taboos no longer act as a deterrent, people
encroach on the sites with impunity.
Distribution areas
and themes
*~ The Horn (Ethiopia, Eritrea, Jibouti,
Somalia): Paintings mainly depicting long
horned humpless cattle (also found in Kenya
on sites around Mount Elgon).
*" Sudan: Painted rock shelters and caves in
Dajo Hills South of Darfur. Depictions of
wild animals and horses whose riders are armed
with shields, and foot soldiers armed with
shields and spears.
>* Zambia, Zimbabwe, South Africa: Paint¬
ings of animals and humans; schematic designs
such as parallel lines and concentric circles with
lines radiating from the centre.
'*" East Africa: The richest area is in central
Tanzania (Dodoma, especially Kondoa district,
and Singida regions). Isolated concentrations
of sites in Tanzania are found in the Masasi,
Mbulu, Mwanza, Bukoba, Unyamwezi and
Haida Plain areas. The Mwanza and Bukoba
sites extend to include sites in the Kenya and
Uganda sides of Lake Victoria Island.
*" Northern Kenya: Engravings ofwild animals
(e.g. antelopes, gazelles, hippos, giraffes and
rhinoceros) and domestic animals (e.g. camels,
donkeys, cattle) and stylized humans.
Painting of men and
animals. Drakensberg
Mountains, Natal
(South Africa).
Dromedaries
and cattle, rock art of
the Saharan plateaux
of the Ennedi (Chad).
The Saharan style
extends as far east as
part of the Horn of
Africa and as far south
as Mount Elgon
(Kenya).
