INTERVIEW SUSAN BUIRGE
'The dancer
is a bond
between
earth
and sky'
What is choreographry for you?
S.B.: For me, there are basically two kinds of
choreographers. There are the visionaries who
project their mental images on stage the
American choreographer Alwin Nikolais is a
good example of this type and there are those
like myself for whom dance is part of a ques¬
tioning process. For me, choreography is like
a detective novel in which the questions are:
who does what? where? when? and how? I
leave out "why"? because in choreography the
"why" emerges from all the other factors.
Could you tell us something about your
methods?
S.B.: My approach to choreography is not nar¬
rative, but abstract. I have developed a process
in which a series of questions are asked about
the structure, space and time. For example:
where the dance is situated on stage, which
dancer enters from which side, who begins,
and so on. I have evolved a process of ques¬
tioning in which the answers are given by using
the tools of chance flipping a coin, drawing
lots, or throwing dice. This allows me to work
on the borderline between what I know and
what I do not know. By using methods of con¬
struction based on chance I can construct pieces
that I could never have imagined otherwise.
48
Susan Buirge is an American
choreographer who livesin
France, where she is associate
artist to the Arsenal in Metz.
For some years she has been
profoundlyinfluenced by
Japanese traditions and
civilization, and her most
recent work with
conte mporary Japanese
dancers and gagaku musicians
will be performed at this
year's Avignon Festival (15-21
July 1998). A compilation of
the notes she made during
visits to Far Eastern countries
has been published under the
title En allant de l'ouest à
l'est, Carnets 1989-1993
(Editions Le bois d'Orion,
1996). Here she is interviewed
by Romain Maitra.
I prepare a section of the choreography on
a piece of paper, beginning with the structure
and the many details of each movement its
direction, which part of the body evokes
which quality, its duration, and various other
details. Then, working with the dancers in the
studio, drawing on their energy and the
atmosphere at that specific moment, I read the
results of the questions from the paper I have
prepared. The dancers have to be very alive and
alert to capture the essence of the movement
that flows out of my body at that precise
moment because once I repeat it, it loses its
initial impact.
Would you agree with the idea that dance is a
cerebral art?
S.B.: I strongly believe that movement in
post-modern dance springs from thought,
setting aside movements prompted only by
animal instincts. The principles of post-mod-

ern dance originate in a certain tradition that
can be traced back to theories set forth by
Kandinsky and Klee.
When we see choreography as the result of
a thought process, we can always feel an under¬
lying sense of construction. All human beings
have a basic need to build, in the same way
that birds build nests. When choreography is
"constructed", spectators can sense its latent
structure even if they cannot actually see it or
identify it. I think one of the reasons why
contemporary dance is interesting and elicits a
wide public response is that it responds to
this basic need. Of course there is the pleasure
of seeing the dancer dance, but there is also
something more.
Do you believe that gestures and movements
have a cultural origin?
S.B.: Of course they do. I noticed this when I
came from America to France in 1970, but I
have felt it even more strongly working with
Japanese dancers since 1992. The Japanese live
very close to the floor, they take off their shoes
when they enter a house, and they kneel for
long periods while working or discussing. This
relationship to the ground and this sitting pos¬
ture give them a unique sense of verticality,
something quite different from the Western
experience. This verticality, incidentally, gives
theJapanese very powerful hips and I have taken
advantage of this in my work with them.
If there is such a thing as a culture of space,
it certainly exists in Japan where space is a
highly elaborated code. People do not touch
one another in public. Although they are
packed like sardines in the subway, there is a
feeling that they are not touching. When meet¬
ing, there is always a sense of distance between
people not as a divider but as something that
brings people together and relates individu¬
als to the community. True contact is based
on an absence of physical contact.
This creates a specific approach to the way
people work together. This "non-touching"
makes the body more vibrant and emphasizes
the way it situates itself in space. Japanese
dancers are far more keenly aware than West¬
ern dancers of where they are in space. Dancer,
choreography and space become one. As a
choreographer who is passionate about space,
I felt entirely at home in Japan.
What else did you learn from your time in Japan?
S.B.: During my first visit to Japan in 1989, 1
discovered bugaku, a dance form that came to
Japan from China in the seventh century and
is performed in a strictly confined space. In
'Human beings
have a basic need
to build, in the
samewaythat
birds build nests.
Contemporary
dance responds to
this need/
Japan, special architectural spaces are set aside
for dance, whereas in the West dance is always
performed in borrowed spaces.
The indigenous traditional dance ofJapan is
kagura, whose many forms are directly related
to the agrarian cycle from planting to har¬
vesting, particularly rice. There are nearly 60,000
kagura dance forms still in existence in Japan
today. Each is danced but once a year, by the vil¬
lagers, conceived for a specific place, on a specific
date, for a specific reason. We know from writ¬
ten sources that some of these forms have
existed for at least a thousand years. All the
dances take place in specially created areas which
are sometimes destroyed after being used.
These forms are thoroughly choreo¬
graphed, in other words the dancers do not
express themselves spontaneously. Their struc¬
tures are extremely sophisticated and complex.
To my mind they comply with all the princi¬
ples of post-modern choreographic con¬
struction because they are based on process.
Most of these dances are performed for the
people of the villages, for the well-being of
the community, the land and the crops. As
such, the dance is the responsibility of the
community. Many of these villagers, who may
be farmers, craftsmen or postmen in their
working lives, are good dancers.
The difference between dance and theatre is a
convention that arose relatively late in Europe.
Where do you draw the line between the two?
S.B.: To me, there is a big difference between
dance and theatre, and it is essentially a differ¬
ence of responsibility. Theatre is the art of the
city, of the polis. It is a moment when the peo¬
ple of the city gather around a subject that
someone has written and that concerns them.
Dance is something different. With his feet
firmly planted on the earth, his body erect and
his head in the sky, the dancer is a bond between
earth and sky. In traditional Japanese kagura,
the dance assumes responsibility for tying what
is of the earth to what is of the sky.
Theatre, on the other hand, ties people to
each other and to the city. In the West, when
dance wants to tell stories, it tends towards
theatre. But this is a use or application of dance
and not its primary function. Today my work
focuses on reaffirming the dancer's responsi¬
bility as a link between earth and sky.
Do you think there is a crisis of creativity in
traditional dance cultures? Are they finding it hard
to adapt to modern sensibilities?
S.B.: As a contemporary artist, I feel a respon¬
sibility to perpetuate traditional dance cultures
everywhere. I believe that cultural traditions

and the contemporary arts should exist on an
equal footing in every culture. There is need to
talk about the distinctions and boundaries
between the traditional and the contempo¬
rary, but as complementary forms. Some of
my own works could never have been created
without the ancient Japanese kagura. But every
culture also needs contemporary artists.
For the Japanese, "contemporary art" is
often trendy art from an American or Euro¬
pean ethos, something that is not part of their
culture. So much contemporaryJapanese dance
that I have seen is an imitation of well estab¬
lished styles, what has been learnt in dance
classes in the United States. Most contempo¬
rary Japanese choreographers discard or ignore
cultural traditions. I am interested in
how they are going to find their own con¬
temporary art. On the other hand, the Japan¬
ese also regard noh, kabuki and bugaku dances
as contemporary forms.
Innovations have been taking place in India
where Chandralekha, for example, has used
the techniques of Bharata Natyam to generate
modern sensibilities. Wu Kuo-Chiu from Tai¬
wan, who was trained in Chinese Opera, has
worked on Macbeth using Chinese opera tech¬
niques as well as certain Western ideas about
space and decor, and an innovative recon¬
struction of the narrative.
In the West, dancers retire young, but this does
not seem to be the case in the East. Why this
difference?
S.B.: The idea of dance as the image of youth
comes from classical ballet. But in contempo¬
rary dance this is not so. Mary Wigman and
Martha Graham danced long after they were
sixty years old, and Jiri Kylian has formed a
company of dancers over forty. Nevertheless,
contemporary dance is not easy on the body.
We aren't made of iron or rubber, and even¬
tually the knees and the hips go! However,
some of the thinking about dance in this cen¬
tury has defined beauty as emerging from
inside, rather than outside, the body.
On the other hand, there are bugaku dances
specially conceived for six-year-old children.
These are not childish dances, they have strict
rules. There is a bugaku dance intended for
performance by a centenarian. Also there is a
"last dance" when one knows one is going to
die, a moving way of acknowledging the span
of a life gone by. This wonderful idea takes
us back to the question of the place of dance
in society, of whether it is merely a decora¬
tive art or whether it can be functional like
much of what we find in ancient dances in tra¬
ditional societies.
Choreography cannot go back to ancient
times it must go forward. In our age of
information processing, computers and mul¬
timedia, the counterpoint of live dance with
live music is more necessary than ever.
