Two
complementary
therapeutic
traditions coexist
among the
Haalpulaaren
people of Senegal
Senegal: a mirror of the cosmos
BY EMMANUELLE KADYA TALL
African traditional medicine seeks both
to cure disease and to make sense of mis-
fortune and illness.
In addition to herbal or biochemical reme¬
dies, a patient must be given psychological and
social back-up, which plays an equally impor¬
tant part in the cure. This has long been known
in traditional African medicine, which tries to
place the occurrence of illness in a context, to
integrate a specific ailment into a wider frame¬
work of disorder and decipher its meaning.
In keeping with a widespread African
notion of the punishment of evil, traditional
healers regard a sick person as the victim of
external aggression of human or supernatural
origin. It is not so much the details of a symp¬
tom as its recurrence and association with
other symptoms which determine the choice

Opposite page, a sacred
baobab at M'Bour (Senegal).
Sick patients pray for a cure as
they walk 7 times round the
majestic tree.
of remedy. If the symptoms persist, the search
for a cure is extended to other systems of med¬
icine including biochemical treatment to relieve
physical pain and traditional treatment to
appease evil spirits.
The two systems exist more in harmony
with each other than in competition. Biomed-
icine concentrates on the patient's body, over¬
looking the fact that the patient is a social being.
The traditional healer takes account of the social
aspect and diagnoses the illness in accordance
with a system of symbolic interpretation shared
by the whole community. Traditional cures,
empirical as they are, are rooted in the sym¬



bolism of a society, such as its cosmology.
The Haalpulaaren
ofnorthern Senegal
The theoretical and practical medical knowl¬
edge of the Haalpulaaren people of northern
Senegal is based on several traditions. These
farming people who have been in contact with
Islam since the eleventh century, are divided
into lineage groups originally based on social
and occupational categories (marabouts,
hunter-warriors, fishermen, craftsmen and
slaves). Each group has its own special field of
knowledge. The hunter-warriors, fishermen
and shepherds know about ecology and med¬
icine. The descendants of the toorooBe group
("God's beggars") are conversant with Islam.
Craftsmen have highly specialized knowl¬
edge of healing. Blacksmiths, through their
mastery of iron and fire, soothe burns and
lance abscesses. Weavers tie knots to stop
headaches and toothache. Leather workers
make small bags to contain the writings pre¬
scribed by marabouts. Everyone acquires some
basic therapeutic knowledge during their
apprenticeship, but some are naturally gifted
healers and only one of these is recognized as
such in each generation and lineage group. He
acquires his knowledge from his group and
his activity is confined to the home and the vil¬
lage. Sometimes, however, his reputation
spreads to the whole region.
These types of healing are not based on a
divinatory form of investigation into the causes
of illness but on observation and experience,
and the purpose of a cure is only to make the
symptoms and physical pain disappear.
Oral and written wisdom
There is another, more scholarly and secret tra¬
dition among marabouts and hunters of sor¬
cerers (or counter-sorcerers). Marabouts never
interpret an illness in terms of sorcery because
sorcerers belong to a pre-Islamic universe rejected
by Islam. They rely on writing, the instrument
of the Qur'an. Counter-sorcerers, who belong
A nurse (left) questions a
healer at Kedougou (Senegal)
about the plants he uses.

to a more relaxed pagan universe, combat sor¬
cerers and use the spoken word, the medium of
the traditional pre-Islamic world. The two
groups stand far apart and do not share the same
cosmological landmarks, but their rivalry does
not prevent them from working together.
They both start by asking themselves why
their patients are ill. Their powers of healing are
based on being able to give explanations con¬
sistent with the theory and practice of cause
and effect in Haalpulaar culture.
Evil spirits
Apart from the will of God, there are three
possible main causes of illness and misfor¬
tune: the actions of sorcerer-cannibals and
spirit-devils, and "maraboutagc" or magic.
Sorcerer-cannibals are human beings who
leave their bodily form and go off in spirit
form to hunt the spirit of their prey. They
belong to the pre-Islamic world of "drinkers of
blood", a parallel group modelled on human
society. They meet at night and organize feasts
to which each of them must bring in turn their
contribution of human flesh. Sorcerers attack
their victims by entering their belly. The symp¬
toms of a sorcerer's attack are hard to detect
because the Haalpulaar medical system relics
less on nosology (the analysis of symptoms)
than on aetiology (the study of causes). But
some symptoms, like unexplained fainting fol¬
lowed by delirium, young children having
nightmares, spitting blood, bloodshot eyes or
nosebleeds, are immediately seen as sorcery.
Spirit-devils are creatures that form part of
Islamic culture. Of monstrous appearance, they
haunt certain places at certain times of the day
when the primitive world reasserts its rights
over the domesticated world. A person who
breaks social laws by walking through the bush
at midday or midnight, or who crosses a
deserted village square may have an unpleasant
encounter. The mere sight of these spirits and
devils can trigger off pathological states ranging
from mental disturbance to partial or total
paralysis. Their vigorous breathing enters the
victim's body and leaves traces such as swellings,
paralysis and damage to the intelligence, indis¬
putable evidence of their attack.
"Maraboutage", or "bewitchment" is an
activity which is widely found in other soci¬
eties where it is known as black magic or witch¬
craft. There arc no symptoms enabling it to be
22 r
THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUARY 1998
diagnosed. However, a range of indispositions
and minor accidents are attributed to this kind
of aggression. Bewitchment targets the social
personality of the subject and its most extreme
effect is imbecility. Used constructively,
bewitchment can increase a person's social abil¬
ities, and in this case it is highly appreciated.
Some Islamic priests are great experts in this.
Three divisions
of the body
The Haalpulaaren divide the body up in three
ways symmetrically, with a left and a right
side, transversally, with the right leg associ¬
ated with the left arm and vice versa, and ver¬
tically, from top to bottom.
The first division symbolizes the contrast
between masculine (right) and feminine (left).
The second is connected with the distortion
caused by the breathing of spirit-devils. The

A healer at work in a Dakar
street (Senegal).
third corresponds to the progress of an ill¬
ness, always from the bottom upwards.
Headaches, for instance, are often said to orig¬
inate from an illness lower down in the body.
Therapy is thus designed to make the illness go
back down to the lower limbs from which it
can leave the body more easily.
Symptoms and causes
The healing arts include physical techniques,
herbal preparations, writings and incantations,
which are often used in conjunction.
Massage, touching, cauterization, cutting
the skin, knots of cotton thread are all
designed, along with incantations and writ¬
ings, to ease pain, cast out the disease and pro¬
tect the sick person.
Medicinal plants are used to purify or heal.
Purification is carried out by taking baths,
inhaling decoctions of leaves and roots, fumi
gating the head or administering enemas. Swal¬
lowing powders and potions also helps.
Short and fervent incantations (ccfi) and
writings (binndi) belong to pre-Islamic and
Islamic tradition respectively. The former use
the spoken word to connect humans directly
with the plant and animal world. Each group
has cefi enabling it to work harmoniously
with its natural environment. With the writ¬
ten word (binndi), communication is indi¬
rect. The marabout writes on a piece of wood
a few Qur'anic verses, figures derived from
some of the verses, or prayers to God. Then he
wipes the board with cotton soaked in water
and gives it to the patient, who will keep it in
a bottle of water which he will drink or use to
wash himself.
So the traditional healer works on two lev¬
els symptoms and causes. On the first level, he
fights the visible evidence of the illness; on the
second, he attacks the illness at its root.
