Ayurveda in a nutshell
INTERVIEW WITH K. M. SHYAM SUNDAR
Dr. K.M. Shyam Sundar of the Centre for Indian
Knowledge Systems (CIKS) in Madras is a specialist in
Ayurveda. Here he explains some of the basic ideas of
this traditional system of medicine which is still widely
practised in India today.
What does the word Ayurveda mean?
The Sanskrit word Ayu means life, and
Veda means to know. In other words,
Ayurveda is the knowledge or science of life.
Ayurveda highlights the basic laws and prin¬
ciples that govern life in the universe. As well
as being concerned with the origin, develop¬
ment and treatment of disease, it discusses
what is beneficial and harmful to life, and what
is conducive to happiness and unhappiness.
What is the relationship between Ayurveda and
the Vedas, India's ancient religious scriptures?
The text known as the Atharva-Veda
explains the theoretical foundations of
Ayurveda and highlights their practical use and
methods of application. It contains anatomical
descriptions and explanations of certain dis¬
eases and methods of treating wounds and
ulcers, as well as a discussion of epidemic diseases
and their management. The Rg Veda, the Yajur
Veda and the Saama Veda also contain mater¬
ial relevant to Ayurvedic medicine.
What are the philosophical foundations of
Ayurveda?
The core belief of the Indian world-view is
that humankind is the epitome of the universe.
In each individual there is as much diversity as
there is in the world outside. To visualize the self
in the entire universe and the entire universe in
the self is the highest aim of human evolution.
The schools of philosophy in which Ayurveda
is rooted thus believe that humankind and the
universe have a common origin and are com¬
posed of the same basic elements.
What are these elements and how is the body
constituted from them?
There arc five basic elements earth, water,
fire, air and ether. They are known as the Pan-
chamahabhootas. Knowledge is perceived
through the senses hearing, touch, vision,
taste and smell.
How is the body constructed and how does it
function?
The basic structural units of the body are
known as dhathus (the word "dhathu" means
"to support"). They are nourished by the inges¬
tion of food. There are seven dhathus in the
human systembody fluids, blood tissue,
muscular tissue, adipose tissue, bone tissue,
nerve tissue and marrow, and generative tissue.
The idea of balance is very important in
Ayurveda. How does it work?
An Indian miniature showing pranayama or breathing
control, an exercise in yoga, the Hindu system of philosophy
and spiritual discipline.

16
THE UNESCO lOURIER FEBRUARY 1998

Opposite page, an 18th-
century Indian depiction of the
network of centres (cakras) in
the "subtle body", or inner
being, of Indian tradition.
Right, warm medicinal oils are
poured onto a patient's head.
This Ayurvedic treatment is
practised at the Arya Vaidya
Shala Institute in India's
Kerala State.



In Ayurveda, the prevention and cure of
all diseases are based on what are known as the
three doshas: Vatta, Pitta and Kapha. They are
the biological representatives of the five basic
elements which constitute the human body,
and in a healthy person they are always in a
state of equilibrium. In this balanced state,
the three doshas control and perform all phys¬
iological functions. When the balance between
them is disturbed, diseases begin and develop.
The doshas pervade the whole body but in
the normal or healthy state Vatta, Pitta and
Kapha are located in the lower, middle and
upper portions of the body respectively.
They support the body as pillars support
a building and they are actually referred to as
"TriSthuna" or the three pillars. Kapha is pre¬
dominant during childhood, Pitta in youth,
and Vatha in old age. The day is divided into
threeparts day, night and the period for the
digestion of food. Kapha is predominant in
the first part, Pitta in the middle part, and
Vatha in the final part.
The human constitution, both physical
and mental, is determined at conception by
the permutation and combination of the three
doshas that manifest in the gametes. This basic
constitution of the individual remains con¬
stant throughout life. It is known in Sanskrit
as Prakruthi, which means "natural" or the
"original form", and is the expression of the
five basic elements.
How is the practice of Ayurveda organized?
Ayurveda has eight branches dealing respec¬
tively with:
*" physical diseases caused by functional or
systemic disorders;
*" all organs above the shoulders;
*" bodily disorders caused by foreign mate¬
rials such as thorns, grass, stone and nails and
involving the removal of pus and highly viti¬
ated doshas;
diseases caused by bites of snakes, spiders
and other poisons of animal or plant origin;
'*" mental disorders and infectious diseases
caused by unknown or unseen creatures or
germs. This branch also deals with sacrifices
and rituals intended to remove evil spirits;
*" children's diseases. Methods of purifying
breast milk and diseases originating from
astrological defects;
*" improving the quality of body tissues,
consequently increasing resistance, strength
and intellect, delaying the ageing process and
maintaining a youthful body;
'* increasing the quality and quantity of sem¬
inal fluid and ova and methods of increasing
sexual desire, vigour and fertility; curing steril¬
ity and other related sexual disorders.
How would you define the relationship between
Ayurveda and Western thought?
Modern medicine and Western thought gen¬
eralize and categorize individuality. Accord¬
ing to the Western concept of normality and
health, what is common in a majority of indi¬
viduals constitutes the norm.
Ayurveda holds that normality must be
evaluated individually, since every human being
manifests his or her own particular and spon¬
taneous temperament and functioning. In the
East, the key to understanding is acceptance,
observation and experience. The West, on the
contrary, believes in questioning, analysis and
logical deduction. Western thought trusts
objectivity, whereas Eastern thought empha¬
sizes subjectivity.
An Ayurvedic doctor (at left)
takes a patient's pulse.
