FACT FILE
Youth finds use
for waste
In 1994 UNESCO's Division of Youth and Sports Activ¬
ities conducted a survey on youth, recycling and devel¬
opment involving 120 youth organizations worldwide
with members aged 25 or younger. Contrary to the
widely held belief that young people who have grown up
in a world bombarded with new products and advertis¬
ing are trapped in a consumer culture, the survey showed
that many young people in both industrialized and
developing countries are taking part in a range of inven¬
tive recycling schemes whose objectives include waste
reduction, environmental education, reconsideration of
current development patterns, job creation for young
people and the socially disadvantaged, and international
co-operation. Their common denominator is that they
all find a use for what is normally regarded as "waste".
The survey gave rise to a Unesco programme,
"Youth and Recycling for Sustainable Development",
which held a World Forum in Nagoya (Japan) from 7 to
12 March 1996 attended by young people from 14 coun¬
tries who swapped ideas and experiences. A number of
practical initiatives were described, including a recycling
programme by the Iumi Tugetha youth group ("You
Bicycle spare
parts sent from
France to Burkina
Faso.
During a field trip,
participants in the
World Forum on
Youth Recycling
for Sustainable
Development
(1996, Nagoya,
Japan) polish
rusty tools in a
recycling
workshop run by
young people in
Asahi-cho, Aichi
prefecture.
and Me Together" in pidgin) from Papua New Guinea
who recover non-ferrous scrap metal and process it for
export. Another project in Pakwach (Uganda) employs
youngsters to collect scrap metal and use it to make
hammers, chisels and other tools.
Other schemes arc based on North-South co-oper¬
ation. A group of young people in France are running a
"Bicycles for Africa" programme, whereby discarded
bicycles arc collected and shipped to a partner group in
Burkina Faso, where they are repaired and sold cheaply.
The German Association for the Promotion of Training
and Employment (GAB) collects and reconditions used
hospital equipment, household appliances and tools and
sends them to Africa and Eastern Europe. A joint Cana¬
dian-Filipino scheme called Race Against Waste orga¬
nizes a competition to make toys from waste in order to
raise awareness of environmental issues in hundreds of
schools in Canada and the Philippines.
The Nagoya Statement signed by participants at the
Forum, "Make Haste Against Waste" (see page 35), rec¬
ognizes the value of recycling initiatives taken by young
people all over the world and identifies some of the
obstacles they have encountered. It emphasizes that recy¬
cling is not an end in itself but a tool in the service of sus¬
tainable development, and calls on educators, NGOs,
the media, artists, consumer groups, businesses, gov¬
ernments and United Nations agencies to support recy¬
cling in policy and practice.
Results of the Forum include the development of the
international network of youth recycling groups, the
promotion of their activities in the media and the exten¬
sive distribution of the Forum Report. A quarterly
newsletter, YARN (Youth and Recycling Newsletter),
was started to serve as a link between the informal group
network. Many Forum participants have been commu¬
nicating with each other and new groups have been join¬
ing the network. Many new partners have received con¬
tainers filled with tools, sewing machines and bicycles.
Japan's Niwano Peace Foundation is awarding a grant
for research designed to set the activities of young recy-
clcrs into an ethical and historical context. A CD-Rom is
being produced to present some of the most innovative
recycling schemes to schoolchildren and young people.
These international initiatives offer training and

employment opportunities to young people who are
outside the social and economic mainstream and, in the
name of sustainable development, present alternatives
to the "throw-away" society. In so doing they are ben¬
eficial to young people in both the developing world
and industrialized countries.
A second Forum to be held in Brazil sometime in
1998 will have the following agenda:
*" evaluation and discussion of progress made since the
first Forum;
*" presentation of research findings into recycling's eth¬
ical implications, followed by a debate;
extension of the youth-group network;
*" involvement of other sectors (media, private enter¬
prise) in the global recycling project;
*" the raising of awareness about the need for sustain¬
able development and redefinition of the North-South
relationship.
The Forum will be organized in close co-operation
with Brazilian institutions including the Ministry of
the Environment, municipalities, NGOs and universi¬
ties. Working groups will discuss specific themes and
try to come up with concrete proposals. An exhibition
of recycled items and materials will be open to the pub¬
lic, which will be invited to take part in presentations and
discussions as at the Nagoya Forum.
Since the Forum will be taking place in Brazil, venue
of the 1992 Earth Summit, the relationship of "Youth and
Recycling for Sustainable Development" to Agenda 21
will certainly be one of the meeting's major themes.
Miki Nozawa
Toys made from
recycled materials.
Right, a miniature
bicycle
(Mozambique).
Below, a tricycle
rickshaw and a
racing bike (Viet
Nam).
