> Science and social
responsibility BY GEORGES B. KUTUKDJIAN
The ethical implications of scientific progress concern everyone
L Today there is a certain degree of disil¬
lusionment about science, especially in
the industrially developed countries. Science
and scientific progress arc indeed raising urgent
questions, for example in the field of genetics.
Who should determine the priorities and
choices of science and technologies and on the
basis of which social goals ? How can we define
democratically the risks which can be consid¬
ered as "acceptable"? What is the level of
responsibility and solidarity which can be
expected from individuals and groups in rela¬
tion to both present and future generations?
The answers to these questions go beyond
the narrow confines of professional practice
and national borders. In a multipolar world
characterized by an unprecedented splinter¬
ing of perceptions, it is more than ever neces¬
sary to strive for the emergence of values which
will make our common existence technologi¬
cally, ecologically and socially viable.
Such ethical reflection calls for a free and
open exchange of experience and ideas among
decision-makers, specialists and representa¬
tives of the civil society, in all its diversity, in
order to identify the issues, set points of ref¬
erence and advocate a range of forward-look¬
ing alternatives.
The development of science must hence¬
forth be examined in a new framework. At
the end of the twentieth century, the "battle¬
field" has become primarily one of economic
warfare, and economies are increasingly being
dominated by scientific knowledge, tech¬
nologies and information. What has to be
done is to develop new forms of knowledge
and share them. Sharing knowledge goes
together with sharing responsibilities. Science
needs to be perceived as a liberating force.
At the same time, wc cannot overlook the
gap between the state of science in the developed
and developing countries. Some of the dcvel-
This model at a research
centre in Faridpur
(Bangladesh) is used to study
flood patterns. The results will
be helpful in designing and
building flood-control
barrages.

1
oping countries are facing crucial choices. Should
the State devote its resources to science or should
it tackle more urgent problems such as access to
drinking water, for example? It should be
recalled that industrial research is non-existent in
the developing countries and that some of them
do not allocate even one per cent of their gross
national product (GNP) to science. For exam¬
ple, there is no research centre for industrial
chemistry in any developing country. Mean¬
while, the industrially developed countries seem
to be suffering the consequences of the lack of
flexibility that characterizes their unwieldy
research institutions. It is as if the ability of sci¬
ence to create wealth were a burden on its own
organization. These cumbersome and adminis¬
tration-oriented structures are discouraging
investment by the industrial sector.
Digital composite image
showing a biochemist using a
virtual reality system to
investigate molecular
interactions.
This is why there is a need to work out
new strategies of scientific development. It is
necessary to establish flexible structures of
international co-operation and to turn science
into an "international undertaking", for exam¬
ple through partnership programmes and by
tightening the links between research work in
all countries through conferences, publica¬
tions, networks, the use of new information
and communication technologies.
It can be seen today that there is a profound
failure of understanding between laboratory
science and the general public. This failure often
stems from a lack of knowledge and is based on
mistrust and fear: research workers sometimes



have a dehumanizing and reductionist view of
the public and, at the same time, the public is
becoming increasingly wary of science.

Scarcity of resources forces
some developing countries to
make the painful choice
between investing in research
and tackling more pressing
problems. Right, a genetics-
microbiology laboratory in
Harare (Zimbabwe).
The public increasingly expects that major
engineering works, in particular those involv¬
ing technological hazards, should be preceded
by comprehensive, stringent and independent
technology assessment studies. These studies
should take into account unavoidable tech¬
nological risks, which cannot be altogether
eliminated but must be reduced to a mini¬
mum, and should also address the question of
hazard management. Their results should be
made public in accessible form.
Transparency, truth and trust
The three Ts in this exercise are: transparency,
truth and trust. Of course, transparency is
time-consuming, but it is an essential ingre¬
dient of trust. This is also the case of truth.
Misinformation or half-truths fuel rumours,
induce fears and discredit those responsible
for public information.
Accumulated experience illustrates that
information provided in an impartial way is
generally rewarded by responsible behaviour
by the population concerned. This is particu¬
larly true in the case of the prevention and
management of natural disasters, where
UNESCO has acquired some expertise.
Surveys show that this is also true in the
medical field, in particular in genetics. In fact,
such a trustful relationship can stimulate the
creativity of a population in response to a new
and unexpected situation. Of course, a number
of international guidelines and directives
adopted by intergovernmental bodies, address¬
ing these issues, exist; for instance in experi¬
mentation on human subjects or clinical tri¬
als, not to mention national Parliamentary
legislation.
The safety issue is closely linked to the
principle of precaution. (See article page 23.)
More specifically, there is a felt need for edu¬
cation and information of the public at large,
starting with the populations directly con¬
cerned. Mechanisms that guarantee the
informed participation of the public should be
devised. To be effective, these mechanisms
must rely on the local authorities and involve
leading figures of the civil society, as well as
associations, consumer groups and other non¬
governmental organizations which have a key
role to play in this area provided they arc
involved from the inception of the project.
Public debate can only enhance a democra¬
tic process very much needed in this area. The
road lies before us, and if there is still a long
way to go, wc know the indispensable provi¬
sions needed for the journey. One such pro¬
vision is a strategy of communication, in order
to ascertain comprehensive information and a
sense of solidarity.
Appropriate communication can only be
based on accurate information, including that
concerning uncertainties when these exist. Nev¬
ertheless, it would be illusory to think that
irrationality can be completely eliminated; it
can only be reduced. As a matter of fact, irra¬
tionality, nurtured by ill-understanding, can

Training farmers in Togo.
be built into a rational argument. This is an ele¬
ment which has often been overlooked.
The most topical example of the need for
ethical safeguards in regard to scientific
progress lies in the field of genetics. This exam¬
ple reminds us of the ambiguity of science,
which is one of the most powerful ingredients
of societies. Today wc can no longer close our
eyes to the ethical issues implicit in science. It
is no longer possible to envisage an ethical neu¬
trality of knowledge that would be indepen¬
dent of its subsequent applications. Thus, the
General Conference of Unesco, on 11
November 1997, adopted a Universal Decla¬
ration on the Human Genome and Human
Rights. This Universal Declaration provides a
NASA scientists set up
equipment to measure gases
that will be given off during
the burning of a deforested
area in the Amazon (Brazil).
consistent and comprehensive set of ethical
principles which should guide both research
and applications of research findings in biol¬
ogy and medicine. (See page 34.)
We also need to be able to think out the
conditions of ethical control over discovery.
Scientific institutions have a responsibility
with regard to the environment of research
workers and must ensure that research is gov¬
erned not solely by the lure of gain but also by
the desire to protect life and cater to the wel¬
fare of human beings.
Finally, science can no longer be regarded as
the repository of truth. Science docs not state
mere certainties. It constantly challenges itself.
It is in the balance between doubt and cer¬
tainty that the ethics of science places its role.
Scientific knowledge no longer depends on
the genius of human beings, it calls for gigan¬
tic resources, both human and technological.
Hence scientists themselves recognize the
importance of the social acceptability of their
undertakings. The level of acceptability relics
heavily upon a balance of measured risks and
unwarranted risks. And present societies have
a clear perception of the need to establish pri¬
orities, even when the alternatives are not
always clearly defined.
This situation places new responsibilities
upon the scientist, the engineer, private and pub¬
lic decision-makers (in particular in the indus¬
trial sector) and the citizen. These responsibili¬
ties can only be assumed through discussion
and the construction of common values.
