commentary Federico Mayor
Africa and
the world
The international community formed by the ] 86 Member States
of UniîSC.O, conscious ¡is it is of what Africa lias to offer )ct wor¬
ried about the difficulties it is experiencing, has made the
continent one of the priority targets of its action. As a follow-
up lo this decision, 1 convened a meeting entitled "Audience
Africa" at UlNICSCO's Paris Headquarters in 1995. The primary
aim for all of us was to "tunc in" to the continent, to give its
countries an opportunity lo express their needs and priorities
and, perhaps for the first time, to set forth their own approach
to the solutions I hat could be applied by Africans themselves.
The fact is that it is for Africans lo determine and map out
the paths their future will lake, even when they resort to exter¬
nal assistance. 1 have recently set up in U.MiSCO an Interna¬
tional Fund for the Scientific and Technical Development of
Africa because I know that no country today can claim to enjoy
effective autonomy without endogenous scientific and techni¬
cal capacities. However, decisions in this field arc political.
The African countries must make sure ihat at least 3 per cent
of the resources managed by the United Mations Development
Programme (UJNI)P) are earmarked for scientific and technical
development and it is clearly up lo these countries to invest a
reasonable proportion of their gross domestic product in science
and technology.
It would be sufficient for them and 1 am referring here to
UMDP's Human Development Report to redeploy 4 per cent
of their military expenditure in order to reduce adult illiteracy
by half, generalize primary education and give women a standard
of education equivalent to that of men. Unfortunately, I am only
too well aware that when the possibility of reducing arms expen¬
diture is raised with African leaders, many of them reply that oth¬
ers should be the first to set an example! I also gather that a sim¬
ilar response is made by the countries which sell them arms and
which are obviously in competition with one another.
That being said, the \ cry great majority of African countries
are just as aware of their difficulties as they are of their respon¬
sibilities. Whenever they have the opportunity to express them¬
selves in a multilateral framework at follow-up meetings to
38
Audience Africa or at meetings concerning the United Mations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s or the
United Mations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa the
African countries clearly state their wishes and plans: they
mean to become partners in progress. For that purpose, in
addition to significant debt relief, they demand an improve¬
ment in the world climate in so many words, markets that
are more open lo their goods.
The entire international community realizes that if Africa
lakes off economically, the rest of the world will derive con¬
siderable benefit because the integration of the African
economies into the international system will be less fragmentary.
The African countries are also stepping up their determination
to pursue the struggle against poverty for the sake of social
development and the democratization of political systems.
The right to peace
Peace, development and democracy are three interdependent
concepts working in synergy with each other. They are the
three apexes of an interactive triangle which we are endeav¬
ouring lo create in co-operation with our sister institutions of
the United Mations system by supporting the efforts made by
ihe authorities of the African countries. It is only in a democ¬
ratic framework preserving plurality, diversity and difference
in accordance with rules accepted by everybody that individ¬
uals can fulfil their potential and society can move forward. This
democratic framework alone meets the conditions for devel¬
opment and allows the full exercise of the human rights set out
in the Universal Declaration, that landmark instrument whose
fiftieth anniversary we are celebrating this year.
However, just as development and the spread of democ¬
racy are bound up with the existence of civil peace, these
human rights cannot be respected in the absence of one essen¬
tial right, and that is the right to peace for which so many men
and women are clamouring in countries stricken by conflict.
This is so powerful an aspiration that it can no longer be ignored.

I accordingly took the initiative of drawing up a draft Decla- jointly accepted and undertaken and which focus on values
ration on the Human Right to Peace, the ideas behind which such as solidarity and tolerance, the community is regaining con-
were approved by Um-'.SCO's most recent General Conference fidenee in itself and in the future.
held in the autumn of 1997. This idea of the right to peace is In Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, a Unksco House
gaining ground and 1 hope that it will win widespread recogni- for a Culture of Peace has been in existence for the past three
tion on the occasion of the celebration of the fiftieth anniver- years. It is a simple building, with a large number of windows,
sary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. in which five people are hard at work. It might be thought to
In addition to recognition of this right, since 1989 I have be a rather insignificant venture, considering the scale of the
been endeavouring lo focus Um'.SCO's activities on the estab- recent tragedy and of the task of reconstruction. Slowly but
lishment and promotion of a culture of peace worldwide. This surely, however, it is making headway. Its activities are pri-
coneept, which was difficult to narrow down at the outset, marily addressed to young people who are, sometimes in spite
has made considerable of themselves, a prey to ethnic
progress: it has been recog- hatred. It is urgent to give
nized by the General Assem- , , , them scope for dialogue. In



lily of the United Nations, has TfirOUgfl prOjeCtS Which arejOWtly 1996 and 1997, two festivals
become part the vocabu- accepted and undertaken and which i"r 1H';'(C !,roi;«,,t u^\hi'r
lary used by politicians, the Hutu, lutsiaiul Jwa children,
military and teachers, and foCUS (M VallieS SUCh 8S Solidarity and who realized, rather hesi-
serves as a common denomi- , . ,, ., . tantly, that living together is
natorforaiikindsofpraetieai tolerance, the community is regaining possil)1(, wh(.n tlu,y can tak(.
initiatives in a wide variety of Confidence 111 ltSelf and in the future. pleasure in a shared project
fields, including basic; educa- and festive happening,
tion, environmental proteo- In the very few secondary
tion, preservation of the her- schools which have been
itage and the struggle for press freedom. immune from the "balkanization" of the country, the pupils
In Africa, there have been countless activities coming under bring the violence surround ing them into the classroom. Then,
this heading. The Peace Week held in Mali from 24 to 28 from time lo time, a team from UM'.SCO arrives, brings the chil-
Mareh 1997 and the International Conference on the Culture dren together and calls on them to speak about the acts ol'vio-
of Peace and Good Governance held in Mozambique from 1 to lenco they have suffered and the violence they themselves have
4 September 1997 are among the events at which a number of inflicted and to try to understand its causes,
leaders voiced their commitment to peace, widespread (lia- In Burundi, however, where the conflict has been responsi-
logue and the peaceful settlement of disputes. ble for a 7 per cent drop in secondary enrolments, it is neces¬
sary to go beyond the confines of the school and reach out to
those young people who have not had any schooling. This is
what we are attempting to do by organizing reconstruction
Innorth-western Mozambique, a country which still displays the training seminars for them, for example.
gaping wounds caused by thirty years of war as a result of col- It is very difficult to evaluate the impact of all these ini-
onization, the liberation struggle and civil war, there is a small tiatives, which are like a delicate fabric woven thread by
town called Chiputo. Half of its 15,000 inhabitants, mostly thread. Less violence was observed in schools in Burundi in
farmers, fled to other regions of the country or else to Zambia, 1997, but it is difficult lo say to what extent we have con-
Malawi or Zimbabwe. In exile, some of them were given train- tribu ted to this. In view of this uncertainty, of the inadequate
ing and emergency assistance, while others were given noth- resources, of the political fluctuations and the demands of the
ing, and even lost everything they had. With the end of the moment, we press on, in the modest yet deep-seated conviction
conflict, they are all returning home, but ihcir resettlement is that it is through education, and education alone, that it is
not without its upsets. UM'.SCO has undertaken to help these possible to foster, develop and enhance the chances of dia-
coinmunities achieve successful integration and learn afresh how logue, for as UiMvSCO's Constitution so aptly puts it "since wars
to live together. begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the
What is above all necessary is to get them to focus on a defences of peace must be constructed",
common purpose, so that the diversity of individual situations The fact remains that time is not the same everywhere,
will become a source of collective enrichment rather than divi- "World time" only exists on computer screens. "Real time"
sion. Iii Chiputo, two teachers provideinstruction for 650 chil- could well turn out to be something different from what it
dren in a primary school; the people who will supervise the means in laboratories and cybercafés. Perhaps time is what
future adult literacy campaign have already been trained; a was inscribed centuries ago on a sundial in Bavaria: "Time hur-
sports ground, a community development centre and a sec- ries, time tarries, time divides, time heals". All these eontra-
ondary school are under construction; and a community radio, dictory properties are characteristic of time in Africa, time
with a range of six kilometres, is planned. It is true that these that is both pitiless and generous, heart-breaking and creative,
activities are on a fairly modest scale, owing to the limited This being so, we need to know both how to overtake time in
resources available, but they are helping to piece together a cases where it is that of division and hatred and how to trust
social fabric that was in tatters. Through projects which are time when it is that of dialogue and rejoicing. M
