H a rd times for teachers
The wo r l d ’s 57 million pri m a ry and secondary school teachers work in conditions that
are a matter for concern.They are neglected by educational policies and are benefit-
ting little from the new technologies which were supposed to revolutionize their pro-
fession.The latest (1998) edition of UNESCO’sWorld Education Report is categorical:
“. . . it has not just been teachers’salaries and status which have failed to benefit in recent
ye a rs from policies towards public expenditure on educat i o n ,” the report points out.“ Te a-
ching and learning conditions and the material situation of the schools generally, in pro-
bably a majority of countries,have also failed to benefit.”
In the countries of the South, the number of pupils and students has exploded in
recent decades. But the number of teachers, their salaries and above all school equip-
ment have not kept pace because of budgetary belt-tightening. In India, over 60 per
cent of primary school teachers teach more than 50 pupils on average, 34 per cent teach
between 51 and 100, and 5 per cent over 100. Many schools have no blackboard and
in some cases no desk for the teacher, and few textbooks, if any.
In the industrialized world, “students’ social behaviour”is “of growing concern in a
number of countries”.The Report denounces violence at school, which is detrimental
both to teachers’ morale and to educational efficiency.
The Report shows the limits of hopes vested in new technologies by recalling that
most of the world’s schools do not even have electricity. At best the new technologies
help to stimulate “thinking and debate about teaching and learning” and enable tea-
chers “to ‘network’with other teachers about what they are doing”. Perhaps to tell each
other about what a hard day they have had. N. K-D. ■
World education report 1998: Teachers and teaching in a changing world. UNESCO Publishing, Paris. 150
French francs. Available in English and Spanish. Russian and Arabic editions forthcoming.
A recent debate on Corsican oral traditions attracted an audience of over 600.A b o v e, Je a n - F rançois Bernardini (with
m i c rophone) of the I Muvrini musical gro u p.
