A Canadian
approach to
cultural resource
management
> The ethics of conservation
i^HM^MHMMMMM
2. The cultural heritage
BY GORDON BENNETT AND NIKITA LOPOUKHINE
Louisbourg (above), on the
Saint Lawrence River (Nova
Scotia), was a key French
fortress in Canada and a
major trading centre. Part of
this historic landmark is being
rebuilt following the original
plans.
In the late 1980s, Parks Canada, the agency
responsible for the conservation of
Canada's cultural and natural heritage, began to
develop a cultural resource management policy,
partly to synthesize good work that had been
done elsewhere, but also to help to cope with
apparently conflicting expressions of conserva¬
tion ethics. The Parks Canada Cultural Resource
Management (CRM) policy drew upon a wide
range of policy and ethical formulations devel¬
oped by other national and international con¬
servation organizations, and in 1994, after sev¬
eral years of development and public
consultation, it was approved by the Minister of
Canadian Heritage, who tabled it in the Canadian
Parliament.
The CRM policy takes into account that
ethical issues operate at at least three levels:
*" ethics of intent or purpose (why?);
*" ethics of means (how? and often who?);
*" ethics of results (what?).
The levels or categories are not mutually
exclusive, but neither arc they necessarily
mutually reinforcing. Ethical means may not
always lead to the desired ethical result, and an
ethical result may be achieved by means that
might not have been the first choice in terms
of the second category. The CRM policy
attempts to ensure an alignment of all three.
The policy consists of three parts: principles,
practice and activities. A training programme
designed to facilitate its implementation empha¬
sizes that ethical decision-making requires that
all parts of the policy be used. In other words,
the policy is not a menu from which you pick
and choose. One of its key features is that it
docs not distinguish between various types of
cultural resources and establish different man¬
agement approaches for each, as is the case with
most other cultural resource management poli¬
cies and international charters. Another is that
it does not focus only on conservation.
Three Canadian examples may help to
demonstrate how the ethic inherent in CRM

has led to better decision-making and to
enhanced respect for cultural resources. Two of
the examples call into question some practices
of professional conservationists, whereas the
third deals with a site facing serious financial
challenges and a series of development pro¬
posals that divided people into pro-dcvclop-
ment and pro-conservation camps.
Critical to all three was the application of a
concept developed by Parks Canada called com¬
memorative integrity, which is used to describe
the health and wholeness of a national historic
site. A site possesses commemorative integrity
when:
'*" the resources (including the place) that
symbolize or represent its importance are not
impaired or under threat;
'*" the reasons for the site's national historic
significance arc effectively communicated to
the public;
the site's heritage values (including those
not related to national significance) arc respected
by all whose decisions or actions affect the site.
LowerFort Garry Walls
(Manitoba)
Lower Fort Garry National Historic Site, which
is located north of Winnipeg, Manitoba, was
an important 1 8th-ccntury fur trade establish¬
ment operated by the Hudson's Bay Company.
Technical experts advised that if action were not
taken, the then 130-year-old perimeter stone
walls would collapse. Consequently, an approach
was developed that led to the reconstruction of
two of the walls. The action was highly con¬
troversial, but proceeded with the blessing of
senior conservation specialists. Following the
development of the Cultural Resource Man-
Fort Garry, north of Winnipeg
(Manitoba), below left, was a
major 18th-century Hudson
Bay Company fur trading post.
Below right, re-enactment of
18th-century daily life in the
fort.
agement Policy, this approach was called into
question on the grounds that the action did
not respect the historic value of the walls and vio¬
lated the commemorative integrity of the site.
The reconstruction approach was abandoned
and the surviving walls have been stabilized.
Fire protection for wooden
buildings
This illustrates a case of conservation ethics gone
awry. For at least a generation many conserva¬
tionists were opposed to the opening of certain
historic wooden buildings to the public on the
grounds that a requirement to provide fire sup¬
pression facilities for buildings accessible to the ,
public was incompatible with the preservation
of the buildings' authenticity. Professional con¬
servationists should have recognized that in the
case of wooden buildings, fire suppression was
not a threat to conservation, but rather an indis¬
pensable instrument in its attainment.
FortHemy, Kingston (Ontario)
Confronted with significant reductions in gov¬
ernment funding, the agency responsible for
operating Fort Henry, a site located in Kingston,
Ontario, developed a business plan that pro¬
posed several initiatives to raise revenues. The
proposals divided the community, various stake¬
holders, and agency staff into pro-development
and pro-conservation camps. A decision was
made to develop a Commemorative Integrity
Statement for the site with the participation of
the various competing interests. The statement
led the persons who had initially advocated con¬
troversial development proposals to conclude
that the proposals were inappropriate.
