C h i l d ren 
behind bars
Aminor in Madagascar has been serving a two - year prison sentence since 1996 for stea-
ling a pineapple. H e ’s lucky. In another country he might have been immediately put
to death,like the homeless child in the village of Kounbra (Chad),who was found
lying in a pool of blood and abandoned to the mercy of a pig, on a soccer field.In January
1997 he was shot for petty theft,says the human rights group International Prison Watch
( I P W ) .The organizat i o n ’s report on children in pri s o n , published in May 1998, d e s c ri b e s
conditions in the 51 countries where data are available.
No one knows exactly how many children are imprisoned around the world, and for
good reason.The question is too thorny, and the definition of a minor varies from one
country to the next. In South Africa, Bangladesh, Ireland, Pakistan and some states in
the United States, seven-year-old children are held responsible for criminal acts. In
Mali, Romania, the United Kingdom, Turkey and Viet Nam the age varies from ten to
fourteen.In Mauritania and Luxembourg, children can be detained at any age. In 1995
nearly 70,000 minors were incarcerated in the United States, and in 1997 there were
1,200 in prison in South Africa and between 15,000 and 20,000 in Indonesia.
Sometimes placed in the same penitentiary facilities as adults, minors are the vic-
tims of many abuses. In Mauritania cases have been reported of children who are strip-
ped naked, bound hand and foot, exposed to the sun and beaten with truncheons or
electric cords. In American prisons, 40,000 minors are raped each year.
In the southern countries, their diet is usually spartan. In Burundi, for example,
they are entitled to just one 300-gramme ration of beans or manioc flour a day. National
legislation makes provision for medical care, but the reality is quite different. In some
Russian prisons, scabies, tuberculosis and typhus are rampant among minors.
At Tongi prison in Bangladesh, young inmates receive training. Yet in a wealthy
country like Luxembourg , no provision is made for their education.
Generally speaking, none of the countries mentioned in the IPW report has found
a just way to treat minors who have broken the law. S.A.O. ■
