What can be done to stop the
deterioration of rock art?
An endangered art
BY FRANÇOIS SOLEILHAVOUP
and on the collective level of institutions, and
a new approach to heritage education.
Attitudes to rock art were for many years
dominated by leading scientists schooled in
the great traditions of history and classical
archaeology, and attention was accordingly
focused more upon questions of interpreta¬
tion than on the problems of conservation.
Scholars such as these thought the most
important thing was to locate, record and
make explanatory comments on the works in
question, and were less concerned about their
actual survival. This is no longer the case.
Everywhere in the world, rock art is suffering
increasing deterioration. As we now know,
anything done to a rock surface upsets the
delicate dynamic balance between the rock and
the atmosphere, which in normal circum¬
stances is regulated over time by environmen¬
tal factors. The micro-organisms present in
and on the rock can then proliferate and either
damage the surface by producing mineral sub¬
stances (biomineralization) or destroy it.
An example of recent
vandalism: this superb
shamanic figure at Black
Dragon Canyon, Utah (United
States), was "enhanced" with
chalk by tourists so that they
could take better photographs.
t| Rock art, whether the kind found deep
inside caves or out in the open, consti¬
tutes a vital feature of the history of humanity.
Fragile and thus exceptionally precious, its sur¬
vival bears witness to the ancient human urge to
leave footsteps in the sands of time. That urge,
which we still feel, is now linked with a duty,
the duty of ensuring that such art is passed on
to future generations. If this duty of conser¬
vation is to be effectively performed, there
must be a code of ethics applicable to research,
both on the individual level of the researcher
Open-air archives
Exposed to the air, any rock surface behaves as
a device for recording environmental varia¬
tions. With current laboratory techniques, it
is possible to study the natural evolution of
the climate and even to date the main stages
of that evolution, but a thoughtless action,
whether by a researcher or by a tourist, can
destroy irreplaceable sources of information.
Although it is sometimes essential to take
microsamples, an ethical approach demands,
both of the researcher and of any decent citi¬
zen, that they show proper respect for the
work itself and for the natural setting of which
it forms part.
As more and more of rock art's rich sources
of information are discovered and recorded, a
better understanding of the complex causes of
damage or even destruction is emerging. In
response to the increasingly rapid urbanization
and industrialization that are profoundly mod¬
ifying many natural landscapes, urgent on-site
rescue and recording operations are being carried
out, but the impact of the methods employed
is not always properly assessed. The fact is that
operations such as the wetting of prehistoric
paintings at sites in an arid environment, the

highlighting of engravings with chalk or even
paint, the application of whitewash and the
taking of casts with the aid of chemicals all
bring about physical, chemical and microbio¬
logical changes in the paintings themselves and
in the rock on which they have been executed.
Pleading recently in favour of conservation,
the Australian specialist Robert G. Bednarik
even urged that books on rock art which
demonstrated direct-contact methods of record¬
ing should be withheld from publication.
It was with such ideas of conservation in
mind that the first International Seminar on
the Conservation of Paintings in the Open
Air held in Algiers and at the Tassili N'Ajjer,
one of the prime World Heritage sites was
convened by UNESCO in 1978. Many such
meetings have since been held, on all five con¬
tinents.
The pros and cons ofecotourism
Rock art is part of the common heritage and
should not be the jealously guarded preserve
of a few specialists, but public interest in and
admiration for it raises major problems. This
is true both of the wealthy countries, where
increased leisure time and cultural tourism
help to step up the pressure on the environ¬
ment, and of the poor countries, where the
development of ecotourism has to serve eco¬
nomic purposes such as bringing in foreign
currency and providing employment, and
where natural sites are treated as consumer
products.
The Manila Declaration on World Tourism
indicates that modern tourism corresponds to
a basic human right to rest and holidays, but it
also points out that "in the practice of tourism,
Three views of the 12,000-year-
old rock paintings at Pedra
Furada, Serra da Capivara,
Piauí State (Brazil). Above, a
rock face. Left, zoomorphic
figures and signs. Right, small
human figures surrounding
animals.
C reation of replicas of the
decorated caves of Lascaux
and Niaux (France) near to the
original sites, This protective
measure was undertaken after
serious damage had been
caused by the presence of large
numbers of tourists in the
caves, which are now closed to
the public. Below left, a
sculptor and a painter
faithfully recreate the walls
and paintings of Lascaux II
from extremely precise
photogrammetric records.
Below and below right, an
engraver and a painter at work
at Niaux II.
spiritual elements must take precedence over
technical and material elements", those spiri¬
tual elements being "the total fulfilment of the
human being, a constantly increasing contri¬
bution to education, equality of destiny of
nations, the liberation of man in a spirit of
respect for his identity and dignity, [and] the
affirmation of the originality of cultures and
respect for the moral heritage of peoples."
One may well wonder whether the princi¬
ples enshrined in that Declaration are not being
violated by the upsurge in organized tourism
over the last twenty years, and whether the
tour operators who offer visits to open-air
rock-art sites anywhere in the world under
the label of ecotourism and "green" or cul¬
tural tourism are not quite simply hijacking
nature by putting a monetary value on it.
To take the case of national parks, the World
Conservation Union (IUCN) defined them in
1969 as areas of land and/or sea especially ded¬
icated to the protection and maintenance of
biological diversity, and of natural and associ¬
ated cultural resources, and managed through
legal and other effective means. At present, only
9 per cent of the dry land surface of the globe
enjoys this status. In such places, priority
should be given to the protection and conser¬
vation of the natural and cultural heritage, but,
in response to understandable public curios¬
ity but also for less honourable reasons wherein
rivalry and conflicts of authority and interests
are intermingled, natural parks and reserves are
being visited by more and more people every
year. Such mass tourism at the world's main
heritage sites is causing their inexorable physi¬
cal deterioration and a diminution of their
essential spiritual dimension.

*s-V*
ïèEftV**; i?
t?0z*3Z
These are difficult contradictions to resolve.
While it is somewhat hypocritical to try and
protect sites by keeping strict control over
visitors' right to roam (so much more is some¬
times declared out of bounds than is accessi¬
ble that a good video cassette might seem a
better bet than an actual visit), what is one to
make of the suspect notion of an "integral
reserve", which, by trying to create little
islands of unspoilt nature, ends up establish¬
ing de jure two categories of nature, one where
anything goes and another where everything is
banned?
Freedom and responsibility
The present tendency to confuse culture with
consumption in "leisure" activities poses a
growing threat to the heritage. Anything that
is consumed is, by definition, destroyed or
at the very least loses much of its value; and
"consumption" of the heritage in general and
of rock art in particular is on the increase. As
a result of too much machine-made pollu¬
tion, the general public and some of the polit¬
ical decision-makers have developed a need for
nature and a concern for the environment.
Many states have adopted a responsible atti¬
tude to their heritage, but much needs to be
done to rally individuals and the public at
large to this cause and to raise their awareness.
This is why education is so important.
From a very early age, children must learn
from their parents, from their immediate
Some of the petroglyphs at the
site of Ausevik (Norway) have
been repainted to increase
their effect and supposedly to
protect them, although this
practice actually causes the
paintings to age more quickly.
Other works have been left as
they were.
These Bronze Age engravings
at Tomskaya Pisanitsa in
southern Siberia (Russia) have
been disfigured by vandals
who carved over them a date
with a double ring around it.
social environment and from elementary
school the basic attitudes and reflexes that
make up life skills, as well as acquiring knowl¬
edge and learning self-respect and respect for
others. It is up to schools to instil in them
from a very early age the rudiments of the eth¬
ical code which they, as future citizens and
members of the public and as potential inter¬
ested amateurs or specialists, will adopt
towards the natural and cultural heritage, so
that a responsible form of freedom as regards
that dual heritage may prevail.
