An open-air museum in the Sahara
BY AXEL AND ANNE-MICHELLE VAN ALBADA
Hunter-gatherers have left a vivid collection of
petroglyphs on the Libyan plateau of Messak
A man with the head of a
jackal or hunting dog returns
from a rhinoceros hunt on the
back of an elephant. Drawing
of rock art figures at Wadi
Imrawen in the Messak massif.
"The rock art of the Sahara is one of
humanity's most astonishing books of
hours. There may be different, older ones, but
there are few that are so beautiful or so fresh.
It is charming as well as surprising, and it
makes us think deeply about the enthralling
message it has brought down tous."
Henri-Jean Hugot [Le Sahara avant le désert)
The Messak plateau in the central Sahara
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) has been inhabited
since the Old Stone Age. But it was probably
only during a wet phase of the New Stone
Age that groups of hunters and herdsmen dec¬
orated the walls of its oases with beautiful
engravings. Unlike the Djebel Akakus and Tas-
sili N'Ajjer regions elsewhere in the Sahara,
which are rich in rock art, there are hardly any
paintings on the Messak plateau and the few
exceptions to this rule clearly originate from
outside the area.
The petroglyphs found on the plateau can
be dated by reference to differences in the nature
and colour of the patinas that have formed on
the rock surface. The most recent date from
what is known as the camel era, which began
some 2,000 years ago. Others executed nearby
show horses, two-wheeled carts and warriors
armed with spears and round shields, and may
have been executed some time around 1500 B.C.
An even older patina coats engravings of many
small spotted Bovidae (animals of the ox fam¬
ily) that are somewhat crudely and flatly por¬
trayed. Many ostriches and giraffes are also
depicted in these engravings, suggesting that
they were made by herders contemporary with
the onset of a very dry period in the region
towards 2000-3000 B.C.
These engravings are very different, partic¬
ularly in terms of style, from the older engrav¬
ings which constitute high-quality naturalis¬
tic art. They incorporate abstract signs and
living creatures, and were doubtless intended
to convey sophisticated ideas.
A hunter-gatherer society
It is possible to talk in terms of an area specific
to a "Messak culture."
The engravings are striking first of all by
virtue of the number and originality of the
scenes, their rich contents, and by the tech¬
niques used to make them. Some are bas-reliefs
where foreground and background are realis¬
tically depicted by fine hammering and partial
polishing. A special "double line" technique
emphasizes the impression of depth in some
areas such as paws and muzzles.
Wild and domesticated animals are the prin¬
cipal theme. The impression of numbers or a
herd is often created by a fan-shaped series of
heads poised at different angles and gradually
shading off into the background from a whole
animal portrayed in detail in the foreground.
The overall effect is striking and bespeaks a
high degree of compositional talent. Different
kinds of horns, often represented in one small
herd, are an indication of diversity. At least
three engravings show milking scenes. Milk
was probably stored in skins or gourds slung
between forked branches. Cattle were used as
32
© Van Albada, Arzens, France

Herd of giraffe in movement on
a promontory of the rich rock-
a rt site at Wadi Issanghaten.
'.r^ u
'H
Hl
ftti
s
¿?*-#
S
"«Si
X
a
g
MF
Ht K -
-*»>
T ¿^fll lu
"*!
a*
Í
pack animals and occasionally as mounts.
Highly ornate saddles and decorated horns
suggest ritual celebrations.
Representations of human beings are not
infrequent but seem to be connected with spe¬
cial events (hunting, rituals, symbolic scenes)
rather than routine activities. The main hunt¬
ing weapons include simple curved bows, ham¬
mers, throwing sticks (probably boomerangs)
and a sort of hook or lasso for trapping
ostriches by the neck. Ban-Barur, or hobbling
stones (found in abundance on the plateau)
used to immobilize wild animals appear in
many engravings featuring aurochs, rhinocer¬
oses, giraffes, ostriches, lions and donkeys. In
some scenes, a braided tie seems to hold the
animal's legs.
A few hieratic figures portrayed in great

detail give us some idea of the clothing worn
by these people, including short pants and
short-sleeved shirts. Some figures wear paral¬
lel cloth strips and a loincloth which is some¬
times topped with a striped belt to which a
pendant holding a triangular structure is
attached. Short bulging tunics are also depicted.
Some men are shown wearing a codpiece.
Women usually wear full, almost ankle-length
dresses and have conical hairstyles possibly
constructed with plaits or braids. They often
have heavy features and prominent noses, but
they may be wearing face masks. These stereo¬
typed women are usually shown with wild
beasts or domesticated Bovidae.
A rich array ofbeasts
The engravings are executed with such preci¬
sion that some of the animals depicted can be
identified with a fair degree of certainty. This A naturalistically rendered
gazelle's head turning to face
backwards. (Wadi Bedis).
>
particularly applies to the large, wild Bovidae,
some of which have since become extinct. These
animals either stand alone or are surrounded
by archers who are usually small. In addition
to several species of antelopes, there are three
large undomesticated animals: the early buf¬
falo, the aurochs and the African buffalo. The
frequency with which aurochs and buffalo are
portrayed indicates their importance in this
area. Engravings representing aurochs trapped
by a hobbling stone suggest attempts at
domestication. Since this animal is the ances¬
tor of the domesticated ox, this mountain¬
ous part of the Sahara may have been an impor¬
tant early centre of domestication.
Wild animals are abundant and carefully
depicted. Elephants and rhinoceroses are often .
shown with their young in a range of
dynamic, realistic poses. Hippopotami and
crocodiles appear in a number of places where
there may have been permanent watering holes
or lakes in a wet climate. Today, there are only
a handful of short-lived gueltas or watering
holes, which do not fill annually but may in
some cases hold water for more than six
months. Fish are rarely depicted. There are
many pictures of giraffes, whose nuptial
parades are sensitively and gracefully shown.
Their coats are sometimes shown by means
of small cup marks that give a beautiful effect.
Ostriches, donkeys, large and small felines
(leopards, lions, jackals), and some wild fox¬
like canines also appear. A few specimens of
warthogs can also be seen.
While this bestiary is limited to a small
number of species, it is nonetheless represen¬
tative of a biotope a small area that supports
its own distinctive community probably a
wooded savannah with permanent watering
holes on the edge of the Murzuk dunes. After
the unusually heavy rains of 1997, the Messak
gueltas held thousands of cubic metres of
water for several months and some of them
even became lakes several hundred metres
long providing a glimpse of what was prob¬
ably a common occurrence several thousand
years ago.
A fertile imagination
Some sandstone walls are adorned with surre¬
alistic animals which reflect a highly original
collective imagination. Fantastic hybrids
gazelle-headed ostriches, elephants with rhi¬
noceros heads, a simian body with a hare's
head rub shoulders with other flights of fancy
that astutely combine the lines of a giraffe, the

body of a rhinoceros and an ox's head. A few
birds, probably mythical, are also shown.
The most original creatures are also the
most common. More than 140 men with the
heads of jackals or hyenas suggest the first
glimmerings of a well-structured mythology.
Their superhuman activities are directed at
large wild animals. They attack and kill rhi¬
nos and aurochs with stone axes or clubs and
then effortlessly carry them on their shoulders
or under their arms, wearing a satisfied grin.
Hanging from their belt is the head or some
other kind of trophy from a rhino or in some
cases an aurochs.
Their relationship with elephants is more
subtle and complex. They stalk elephants
aggressively, their lips curled back to give a
ferocious display of teeth, and brandishing
axes or clubs, but never seem to wound their
Small delicate figure of a
giraffe on a slab of rock.
Wadi Imrawen.
prey. One outstanding engraving shows a
jackal- or hyena-headed elephant driver astride
a calm elephant which holds a small rhino
pinned upside down beneath its thigh.
Another shows a small jackal-headed man on
the heels of a large pachyderm, catching and
licking its fresh excrement.
A mysterious cosmogony
The absence of written sources makes it diffi¬
cult to interpret this cosmogony. The figures
described above all seem to belong to ritualized
scenes in which composition and the attitudes
of the figures are stereotyped. The role of
masked men should probably be interpreted
symbolically. A new reading of the animal
representations might make it possible to
identify traces of a specifically Messak cos¬
mogony.
Any discussion of the engravings on the
Messak plateau must address the hundreds of
identical, abstract signs they depict, includ¬
ing oval cup marks and reticulated circles. A
local interpretation associates these with sink¬
ing wells. There might be a generic link with
water, or more generally, with some kind of
fertility symbolism. These signs were certainly
important, given their number, but their
meaning nonetheless eludes us.
The existence of this surprising universe
1 in the world's largest arid desert is certainly
I no accident. The cultural centres in these for-
| gotten mountains are closely linked to the cli-
I matic past of the Saharan sub-continent. Their
altitude and the moister climate of the early
Holoccne epoch (beginning around 10,000
years ago) fertilized the deep and silty earth
where today the aridity and erosion of thou¬
sands of years have sterilized it.
The origins and histories of these cultures
are still a mystery. We can, however, suppose
that the Messak plateau along with other
mountain ranges of the central Sahara was one
of the centres of development of the New
Stone Age. The high proportion of symbolic
images left by the people who lived there



should not veil the message of these open-air
engravings, namely that the people of the Mes¬
sak were above all hunters and herdsmen who
were perfectly integrated into a living nature
that they respected.
The authors would like to thank Messrs Mohammed
Ibrahim Meshai and Saad Salah Abdulaziz, curators of
the antiquities of the Fezzan, for their kind assistance
in revealing the full extent of this prehistoric heritage.
