A materialist
vision of the
afterlife
BY GREG OXLEY
For Marxists, the hereafter is an
instrument of power wielded by
the dominant social classes
The Ladder of Virtues,
facsimile of an illustration
from a lost medieval
illuminated manuscript, the
Hortus Deliciarum (Garden of
Delights).
The story of the hereafter in human
I thinking is almost as old as humanity
itself. The material conditions in which early
man strove for survival posed problems to
which empirically acquired knowledge, the
primitive "science" of the times, could not
provide answers. The history of human beings,
as distinct from the history of apes of a more
or less advanced type, begins with the history
of their production of the means of their own
existence. The degree of sophistication of the
tools and weapons developed by primitive
humans, of the "means of production" of the
necessities of everyday life, conditioned their
mental representation of the world.
To the extent that the laws of nature
remained hidden from human understand¬
ing, natural phenomena necessarily appeared as
being animated by wild, uncontrollable forces
which influenced human fate. Imaginary "spir¬
its" inhabited the trees and forests, the rivers
and marshes, animated the skies, the rain, the
wind, light and darkness, and the animals man
hunted. In his own dreams, in his ideas and
imagination, man was inclined to see the man¬
ifestations of a spirit within himself.
With the emergence of the early civilizations,
and with the corresponding increase in human
power over the environment, the general trend
in human thought, which can be traced in var¬
ious forms through surviving artistic represen¬
tations and inscriptions, was to separate the
world of gods and spirits from the environ¬
ment, and to imagine their existence in another
world. From their distant abodes, the gods
weighed the greatness and virtues of humankind,
and rewarded or punished earthly beings.
Each new step in the acquisition of pro¬
ductive techniques led to changes in the rela¬
tions between humankind and the natural
world, and also in the social and economic
relations existing between the producers them¬
selves. These changes would in turn shape and
transform the fantastic representations of the
world in human minds. Once worldly phe¬
nomena are understood as the consequence of
a natural process, the belief in divine or spir¬
itual influences is weakened and tends to dis¬
appear, not immediately, but after a certain
delay. "Human consciousness lags behind
events", as the materialist philosophers of the
nineteenth century explained.
Thus the development of the means of travel
and of commercial exchange and the emergence
of common language over wider areas, under¬
mined locally-based folklore and gave way to a

new, more universal, hierarchy of beliefs and
attendant rituals. The emergence of monothe¬
ism, the belief in a single divinity, reflected the
understanding of the world as a "whole", as a
single entity whose different component phe¬
nomena arc related to and in interaction with
one another.
Historically, therefore, through many dif¬
ferent forms, the basis of the belief in the exis¬
tence of other worlds was the human attempt
to explain the material environment, filling
the gap, as it were, left by the still rudimentary
level of empirically acquired knowledge.
Monks are shown collecting
tithes from the people at the
time of Pope Innocent II (12th
century) in this illustration
from a 19th-century French
History of the Popes.
Ideologicalpressures
However, this is not the only reason for the
rooting of such beliefs in social conscious¬
ness. When the level of development of pro
ductive technique renders possible the eman¬
cipation of a part of society from physical
labour, dividing society into different and
mutually antagonistic social layers, people's
relationship with the world of spirits becomes
not only the expression of a given level of cul¬
tural development but also an expression of
the social relations established between groups
and classes. The perception of gods and super¬
natural powers becomes an element in social
conflict. The dominant layers of society create
for themselves a heavenly justification for the
perpetuation of their rule.
The history of the Christian religion is a
clear illustration of this. At each historical
stage, Christian ideas about the world reflected
not only the general cultural and scientific lev¬
els reached by society, but also the ideological
and political pressures of the contending social

At Wittenberg, on 10
December 1520, the German
religious reformer Martin
Luther burns the Papal bull
Exsurge Domine calling on
him to retract his ideas. (19th-
century French engraving).
forces of the times. The hierarchy of the
Roman Church spent centuries haggling over
the origins of the Devil, his role in the world,
the extent of his powers, his relation to God.
It would be wrong to see in such seem¬
ingly interminable debates only the product of
over-excited imaginations. Underlying the
need to give a more precise definition to the
role of the Devil, for instance, was an essen¬
tially political problem. To minimize the pow¬
ers of Satan would weaken allegiance to the
Empire as a safeguard against devilish male¬
dictions. On the other hand, Rome was con¬
cerned that the tendency to see the "work of
the Devil" behind the most ordinary misfor¬
tunes would lead to a greater respect for the
Devil than for his divine opponent, whose
influence was perhaps less perceptible to poor
peasants. Thus the need to give a more restric¬
tive definition of the powers of the Devil on
earth.
The ideological conservatism of the Church
reflected its position as an integral part of the
ruling land-owning classes within feudal soci¬
ety. The imagery of heaven and hell used by the
medieval church reflected and idealized the
existing social order. God, the king, was pic¬
tured as sitting at the head of a pyramid of
orders, the lower orders owing deference to the
higher, whose place and authority was con¬
ferred by God himself. Heaven was depicted as
a place of joy, peace, and general well-being.
On the other hand, those who, during their
passage on earth, fell foul of God, whose
The German reformer Thomas
Münzer preaching in the
Klettgau region. (19th-century
engraving).
"word" was infallibly interpreted and commu¬
nicated to them through the laws of the Roman
Church, would be condemned to everlasting
torture in hell. To this day, the walls of many
church buildings are decorated with the most
horrifying representations of what hell reserved
for those who strayed from religious con-
formism. The concepts of heaven and hell were
inseparable. It can be safely assumed that, in the
mind of a medieval peasant, one of the best argu¬
ments for doing whatever was necessary to get
into heaven was to avoid being sent to hell!
Social unrest
and religious beliefs
When social antagonisms reach such a point
that conflicting interests break out into open
struggle and warfare, the interpretation of the
"holy word" and the role attributed to the
"hereafter" in earthly affairs form part of the

ideological expression given to the needs and
interests of the contending forces.
A great many illustrations of this idea could
be given, and not, of course, solely in relation to
the Christian world. But perhaps one of the
most striking examples is to be found in the
period of the reformation and of the peasant
war in Germany which took place in the first
quarter of the sixteenth century. When Martin
Luther launched his attack on the clergy of the
Roman Church, this was seen as a signal for
revolt on the part of all those social strata who
sought to free themselves from its domination.
The burghers, the lesser nobility and the princes,
joined by some elements of the lower clergy,
stood to gain from a weakening of the power of
Rome and from the confiscation of Church
lands and property, much of which had been
acquired by means of forced tributes, forged
documents, or political blackmail at their
expense. The peasantry, which bore the entire
feudal hierarchy upon its back, stood to gain
most of all from a change in the social order.
Initially, Luther himself adopted a particu¬
larly virulent tone in relation to Rome and the
ruling layers of society. But with the outbreak
The City of Cod,
facsimile of a medieval
miniature from the Hortus
Dellciarum (Garden of
Delights).
of a peasant uprising on a massive scale, he
changed his tone in favour of mere "passive"
opposition to the Catholic hierarchy. He turned
against the "murdering peasant hordes", and
called upon the princes to "stab and strangle
them". After a bloody civil war, the peasant
armies were finally defeated, and their most out¬
standing representative, Thomas Münzer, was
among those put to death.
Heaven on earth
For Münzer, the notion of heaven as another
place, visited in another life, was a snare for
the poor. He brought paradise down to earth.
It was to be established here and now by the
revolutionary realization of the will of God.
Hell was pictured as being no different from
the existing social order, ruled as it was by
"robbers and murderers".
Münzer's doctrine was a striking example
of the translation into religious terms of the
social and economic aspirations of a particular
social class, namely the poor peasantry of his
times. His vision of the Kingdom of God was
one of a classless society, where work and
rewards for work were to be shared, without
private property, or, at any rate, with an equal
sharing of property.
The same phenomena occurred during the
English revolution which overthrew the
Monarchy in 1649. Early protestantism in
England, and particularly that preached within
the ranks of Cromwell's "New Model Army",
was very close to Münzer's doctrine, and was
accompanied by a flourishing of movements
aiming to establish "heaven on earth", form¬
ing communities based on the sharing of prop¬
erty and earnings. Faith in salvation in an after¬
life is most prevalent in times of social inertia,
and recedes as soon as social forces move into
action on a massive scale. Even Cromwell's
famous battle-cry shows the entirely subor¬
dinate place the "Defender of the Faith" attrib¬
uted to heaven in earthly affairs: "Trust in
God . . . and keep your powder dry!"
The prevailing religious ideas of a given soci¬
ety in a given epoch are established not in a vac¬
uum, not as the result of "pure" reasoning, but
in close relation to the societies and modes of
existence in which they emerge. The role attrib¬
uted to the "afterlife" by human beings has a
definite function within human society, and
is constantly shaped and altered to bring them
into conformity with the requirements of the
different social groupings and classes within it.
In the final analysis, no religious beliefs can
stand above the social and economic foundation
upon which they rest, nor free themselves fro m
the influence of the material interests of con¬
tending social forces in a given epoch.
