The
universality
of rock art
Unesco ¡s mandated by its Con¬
stitution to assure "the con¬
servation and protection of the world's
inheritance of works of art and monu¬
ments of history and science".
For fifty years Unesco has therefore
sought to encourage and promote inter¬
national action designed to ensure that
the physical and non-physical expres¬
sions of human creativity are consid¬
ered as an indivisible whole by the inter¬
national community. It is important that
all these expressions should be
respected as elements of the universal
heritage, and conserved, studied and
transmitted to future generations.
In accordance with its mission to
aid its Member States, Unesco has
included in its priorities "The safeguard
of rock art all over the world, particu¬
larly with regard to compiling an inven¬
tory of it, conserving it, training tech¬
nicians, and promoting exchanges of
knowledge and public information."
These pursuits are a token of interna¬
tional recognition of the universal value
of a fragile cultural heritage.
Rock art is a classic example of a
universal art. These first known expres¬
sions of the sensibility and aesthetics of
our distant ancestors are inscribed on
rock surfaces in many world regions.
From Australia to Africa, from Asia to
the Americas and Europe, our prehis¬
toric predecessors inscribed the places
38
m /
*
/':/
m
:* "à:$ à
FOZ COA (Portugal) is an open-air rock art site at least 18,000 years old which extends over 15 km.
This exceptional complex is threatened by the construction of a dam. A Unesco mission visited the
site and later published a report outlining the steps necessary to safeguard the engravings. Above,
drawing of a Magdalenian-style horse at Foz Coa.
where they halted on their journeys,
their shelters and their sanctuaries with
works of art which stir our feelings and
our admiration. Rock art is the only
form of human cultural expression
which has been practised without inter¬
ruption from tens of thousands of years
ago until the present day.
In its original cultural context, it was
protected by the respect that surrounded
it, just like the environment of which it
formed part. Now, in shelters or on rocks
in the open air, rock art is subject to all
kinds of aggression from nature and
from people. This precious art has today
become a threatened heritage.
MARIE-JOSÉE THIEL
Cultural Heritage Division
Unesco
Extracted from: i.e chemin secret des
Ngarinyin du nord-ouest australien, Paris,
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle,
1977 © Pathway Project Pty Ltd 1997
