commentary Federico Mayor
Sharingan ethic
for the future
Let us cast our minds hack to the world situation as it was
in 1945. In that fateful year the North was in ruins and
a sombre post-war mood prevailed. In the South, the
struggle to achieve freedom from colonial domination
was already under way, and in many cases a pre-war
atmosphere reigned. The founders of UNESCO decided to
confront this civilization of weapons with the weapons of
civilization. They took inspiration from the radiantly sim¬
ple idea of constructing peace in the minds of men
through education, science, culture and the free flow of
ideas in short by communication.
In the prophetic words of the French poet Paul Valéry,
they intended to build a "league of minds" as well as a
League of Nations. At the same time they were deter¬
mined that this international forum should serve the eth¬
ical goals which the world community set for itself: peace,
the intellectual and moral solidarity of humanity and its
common prosperity, freedom and justice.
As the intellectual institution of the United Nations
system, UNESCO has been entrusted ever since its incep¬
tion with an ethical mission. In this capacity, it must con¬
demn wrongs, whatever their origin, wherever they occur
and whatever form they take. UNESCO must have the
courage to raise its voice and take action. It must not
allow itself to tolerate the intolerable. To my mind this mis¬
sion is today more timely and urgent than ever. UNESCO
can and must make its presence felt in the world by
the force of ideas and above all by setting an example.
In less than three years' time, the world will enter
the third millennium. It is now, when the twenty-first
century is already knocking on UNESCO's door that we
must think about the Organization's future shape. UNESCO
36 r
W THE UNESCO lOURIER JANUARY 1908
will become increasingly forward-looking, because the
Internet, the protection of the human genome, the increas¬
ing development of what Nestor Garcia Canclini has
called "hybrid cultures", the rapid emergence of "virtual
cultures", lifelong education for adults and the revolu¬
tion in the efficient use of environmental and energy
resources are all 21st-century issues.
Development is now in jeopardy. We cannot close our
eyes to poverty and indebtedness, exclusion and discrim¬
ination, non-stop degradation of the environment, exploita¬
tion, persecution and marginal ization affecting whole pop¬
ulations especially indigenous populations the scandal
of famine, illiteracy, intolerance, violence, war, social
instability and even after racial apartheid the threat
of social and urban apartheid, which is gradually under¬
mining the foundations of democracy. On no account
should wc bequeath to posterity this grievous legacy.
Can we accept the fact that almost one-third of the
population of the least developed countries die before the
age of forty or that 20 per cent of the inhabitants of the
planet share 1.1 per cent of world income? As Mr. James
Wolfensohn, the President of the World Bank, recently
pointed out, there can be no satisfactory economic devel¬
opment without parallel social development.
The answer to the challenge of poverty is contingent
upon sharing, which is to my mind the mainspring of
UNESCO's mission. The duty to share is but another form
of the duty of solidarity, that "intellectual and moral sol¬
idarity" of humanity which is the only possible basis for
a true and lasting peace.
We must share in time as well as in space. Our duty
is to think of future generations. What do we want to
pass on to our children? The prospect of a better future,
or chronic poverty? Opportunities for all, or hardship

for a quarter or even a third of humanity? A living envi- by half, ensure universal primary education, and give
ronmcnt, or a planet without a future? women an educational level equal to that of men." Mr.



An ethical approach to the future must recognize the Wally N'Dow, Secretary-General of the World City Sum-
vital responsibility of today's generations towards future mit, Habitat II, has said that "The resources exist to pro-
generations. It is now that we must lay the foundations of vide every man, woman and child on this earth with safe
this ethic if we wish to build the peaceful conditions nee- water and sanitation and a roof over their heads" for less
essary for development in the next century. At a time than $100 per person. It is through such investment in
when people all over the world are acting as though development and human security that arms will one day
they had rights over the people of tomorrow we are start- give way to the ballot box, and the force of reason will
ing to realize that wc arc compromising the full exercise finally be victorious over the logic of force,
of human rights by future generations. Hence the estab- "If the people begin to act, the leaders will follow." I
lishment of UNESCO's International Biocthies Committee. remember that sticker on the bumper of a ear in Atlanta,
Hence the Declaration on the Protection of the Human which reminded me that by joining forces and by creat-
Genome, the first universal standard-settinginstrument ing synergies we can change the world. That was the
in the field of living matter. Hence the Declaration on the message of Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi, Mother
Responsibility of the Present Generations towards Future Teresa, and the founding fathers of the United Nations
Generations, which may, I believe, mark the beginning of and UNESCO. It was the message of all my predecessors as
a genuine worldwide awareness that could lead to prae- Director-General oÍ'Un'ESCO, and I am sure it will also be
tical initiatives. that of my successor. To
Genetics clearly procrastinate is to betray
involves ethical issues; the future by default,
less obvious are the ethi- UNESCO ITlUSt COndemil WfOligS, The participation of
cal dimensions of other , , , everyone and the responsi-
aspectsofthecommonher- whatever their origin, wherever bmty of citizcns arc thc
itage of humanity which we ft ^^ rf whatever fQm^ securest foundations of a
have the duty to preserve J J living luture based on trust
and pass on: the scientific {9^ ft must ^gyg ^g COll^ge tO aml th(! caPacity oí human
heritage (i.e. knowledge), beings to change, to build
the natural heritage, the fSlSe itS V0ÍCe dPCt take aCtlOfl. It their own lives and to fos-
cultural heritage, and ter the spirit of continuing
above all the axiological "lUSt ílOt allOW ltSelf tO tomate the intellectual, cultural and
heritage, by which I mean intnlorahlo biological development, the
the set of values, few in (lowing river that is our sub-
number, that in all cul- stance. Now is the time for
tures and in all ages illus- us to rephrase the Cartesian
trate the greatness of cogito for the citizen of the
human beings and the force of humanism. twenty-first century and say: "I am involved, therefore I
These values were slowly and painfully shaped, at a am."If I am not involved, I may count as a statistic and my
cost of struggle, suffering and sacrifice. They are part of vote may be counted at election time, but I do not really
a common past in which we are rooted and which enables count. This is why education is the only true democratic
us to see our way into the future. The great risk we run issue. As the International Commission on Education for the
is to forget the past. Without memory ethics would be a Twenty-First Century chaired by Mr. Jacques Delors has
disembodied force. Without the opportunity to compare shown us, education does not only mean learning to know,
it would be an arbitrary absolute. The values of human learning to do or learning to be; it also means learning to live
ethics are what has given us, and will give us, the together, and hence to build tomorrow's society,
strength to find unity in diversity. But above all we must dare to love. Today's biggest
A great deal can be done with slender means. Accord- deficit is not an economic deficit, hut a deficit of love,
ing to the United Nations Development Programme's lat- Education without love, without sharing, without soll¬
est World Development Report, it would be enough for darity with others is dust and ashes, a dead letter, empty
the developing countries to redirect 4 per cent of their talk and abstract words. As the African proverb has it:
military expenditure "in order to reduce adult illiteracy Love is the only thing that increases when it is shared.
