The cod collapse 
44 THE UNESCO COURIER
T he fish plant in the Newfoundland town of
Trepassey sits mainly idle on Canada’s nor-
theastern shore–a depressing reminder of
the days when cod were plentiful and the streets
bustled with 1,400 working residents.
Trepassey is practically a ghost town now.
The Sunday-night bingo game which used to
draw hundreds of residents now sees about a
dozen people gambling for a measly jackpot.
The community used to screen movies in the
parish hall but no one can afford admission
these days, and many of the young people have
left anyway. Families drift out of town almost
e ve ry we e k , abandoning homes they know
they’ll never sell. “Some of them didn’t even
bother to board their windows,” says Don
Corrigan, a veteran fisherman who still lives in
Trepassey. “They just locked the doors and
moved on. They’ve no intention of coming
back.”
This is the human side of an environmental
disaster. The cod collapse devastated entire
communities in Newfoundland, leaving most
people with no other skills to fall back on.
Today, sustained only by government assistan-
The once prolific north Atlantic cod have virtually
disappeared from Canada’s east coast, leaving
behind a trail of unemployment and anger.

ce, fishermen fester with helpless anger: How
did we let the cod die?
“The cod stocks failed because of greed,”
says Dr. Richard Haedrich, a respected fishe-
ries biologist at Newfoundland’s Memori a l
University, “People wanted all the money they
could get out of the fish.”
After greed, the answer gets more complex,
involving a tangle of government rivalries and
scientific arrogance. In the end, the cod were
defeated by fishermen who became too good at
fishing, scientists who ignored what they didn’t
know and politicians who refused to make the
tough decisions—until it was too late.
By the time Canada’s fisheries minister
John Crosbie closed the northern cod fishery in
July 1992 and threw 40,000 Canadians out of

their $500-million a year industry, decades of
over-fishing had decimated the ground fish
stocks and virtually emptied one of the most
bountiful areas of the Atlantic. At the time, Mr.
Crosbie tried to pacify fishermen by saying the
moratorium would be over in two years. Not
twelve months passed and Mr. Crosbie was for-
ced to amend his overly optimistic time line: it
would be at least half a decade before the cod
returned. Six years later, the cod stocks remain
at the lowest level observed in history—what
one senior fisheries bureaucrat termed “a cala-
mity of almost biblical proportions.” More
recently, cod was listed as “vulnerable” on
Canada’s endangered species list.
The collapse of the North Atlantic cod is a
tragedy with few innocents. Fishermen, both
A cod trawler off Newfoundland.

offshore and inshore, were guilty of misrepor-
ting their catches, of swarming the cod on
s p awning gr o u n d s , of dumping tonnes of
unwanted fish overboard to rot on the ocean
floor.The days of the radar and high-tech traw-
lers—both foreign and domestic—meant that
entire schools of fish could be easily hunted
down and sucked out of the Atlantic.
Scientists, meanwhile, consistently overesti-
mated the size of the stocks. Fisheries science,
at best, is imprecise. Too little is known about
the nature of the cod and its relationship to the
ocean food chain, predators like seals,and tem-
perature changes. But scientists relied too hea-
vily on offshore catch rates for population esti-
mates, and confused efficient, modern fishing
with what was really happening in the ocean.
With the scientists guessing too high, fisher-
men slashed a far larger portion of the cod bio-
mass than the quotas intended.
“They weren’t fishing what was produced,”
says Dr. Haedrich, “They were fishing what
was producing. Scientists never admitted how
great the uncertainty was and when decisions
were made they fell on the side of what was
favourable economically, rather than what was
conservative ecologically. Nobody stuck up for
the fish.”
Protecting the cod fell to the federal
Department of Fisheries and Oceans. But even
when government scientists warned in the late
1980s that the stocks were in trouble, politi-
cians in Ottawa hesitated to lower quotas and
slice into the fishermen’s income.The industry
was already indirectly subsidized,crowded with
fish processing and canning workers and fisher-
men who work for several weeks and then claim
unemployment insurance for the rest of the
year. Catching less fish would mean hardship
particularly for the people in Newfoundland
who have few other employment options. It
would force layoffs—and the possible closure—
of fish plants. Faced with this reality and inten-
se lobbying from provincial politicians to main-
tain the fishery, the government in Ottawa set
quotas based on social and economic factors,
not science.
Today, in the out ports of Newfoundland,
fishermen forced into poverty have begun to
give up. Many of them no longer expect to see
the cod return in their lifetime.They talk about
selling their licences back to Ottawa and wal-
king away from the sea for good—a painful step
for people who thought they’d fish forever.
The morat o ri u m , s ays Newfoundland
fishermen Wilfred Williams, “destroyed every-
thing I ever worked for. I made my living from
the sea all my working life—where am I going
to turn?” ■
Erin Anderssen
O t h e r s
7 %
1 4 %
1 5 %
3 1 %
3 3 %
1 9 %
5 1 %
1 9 %
2 2 %
2 %
United States Developing countries Ja p a n European Union
I m p o r t s E x p o r t s
S h a re of major markets in total international trade in 1994
Trends in the relative rate of increase in landings by ocean
1951 1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996
All marine areas
Atlantic Ocean
Pacific Ocean
Indian Ocean
Mediterranean
Sea
