United Nations international instruments
concerning the protection of persons subjected
to detention or imprisonment
<*- Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10
December 1948
< Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners, 30 August 1955
* International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 21 December
1965
« International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 16 December 1966
« Declaration on the Rights of Mentally Retarded
Persons, 20 December 1971
<*- Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 9
December 1975
« Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials, 17 December 1979
« Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the Role
of Health Personnel, particularly Physicians, in the
Protection of Prisoners and Detainees against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, 18 December 1982
*- Safeguards Guaranteeing Protection of the
Rights of Those Facing the Death Penalty, 25 May
1984
*- Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 10
December 1984
* United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Administration of Juvenile Justice (The Beijing
Rules), 29 November 1985
'* Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, 29 November
1985
Basic Principles on the Independence of the
Judiciary, 29 November 1985
» Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under Any Form of Detention or
Imprisonment, 9 December 1988
« Principles on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions, 24 May 1989
*" Convention on the Rights of the Child, 20
November 1989
" Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials, 7 September
1990
< Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers, 7
September 1990
*- Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors, 7
September 1990
<* Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners,
14 December 1990
* United Nations Rules for the Protection of
Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty, 14 December
1990
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
Non-custodial Measures (The Tokyo Rules), 14
December 1990
* United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of
Juvenile Delinquency (The Riyadh Guidelines), 14
December 1990
<* Model Treaty on the Transfer of Proceedings in
Criminal Matters, 14 December 1990
Model Treaty on the Transfer of Supervision of
0 ffenders Conditionally Sentenced or Conditionally
Released, 14 December 1990
" Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, 18 December 1992
Drug Addiction, a poster by Ruedi Baur and Félix
Müller (France). This work was shown at an
exhibition of posters and writings organized by
International Prison Watch, a non-governmental
organization based in Lyons (France). The
purpose of the group is to monitor prison
conditions worldwide and to draw attention to
violations of prisoners' rights.
A UN-Unesco manual
on prison education
Most of the millions of people in
the world's prisons and other cor¬
rectional institutions have had no higher
education. Even in countries with a univer¬
sal right of access to 10 or more years of
schooling, a large minority faces difficulties
in reading, writing and numeracy and in
conducting social transactions. Providing
them with basic education is a prerequisite
for achieving the internationally agreed goal
of ensuring a basic level of education for all.
Some of the ways in which prison edu¬
cation can be promoted and some existing
practices in countries throughout the world
are reviewed in Basic Education in Prisons, !
a manual published jointly by the United
Nations and the UNESCO Institute for
Education (UIE), UNESCO's specialized
centre for research and development in adult
and continuing education.
The manual arose from a UIE project to
investigate basic education in prisons and in
response to a United Nations request for a
tool to provide the basis for development
of prison education and to promote inter¬
national exchange of expertise and experi¬
ence in this field.
Designed for decision makers, admin¬
istrators, educators and non-governmental
organizations concerned with education in
penal establishments, Basic Education in
Prisons reports on the status and potential
of prison education strategies, giving con¬
siderable attention to the views of practi¬
tioners and, where possible, of inmates.
This overview is complemented by case
studies from Botswana, China, Costa Rica,
Egypt, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands,
Sri Lanka and the U.S.A.
1 Basic Education in Prisons, United Nations Office
at Vienna/UNESCO Institute for Education, 203
pp., Hamburg, 1995, ISBN-92-1 -1 30-164-5.
For further information:
Unesco Institute for Education
Feldbrunnenstrasse 58
D-20148 Hamburg, Germany.
Tel: (+49) (0)40 44 80 41
Fax: (+49) (0)40 410 77 23
Internet: http//www.education. unesco.org/uie
38 > G'THE UNESCO COURIER JUNE 1998

THE UNITED NATIONS,
UNESCO AND PRISONER EDUCATION
I The United Nations is the foremost
I international organization concerned
with the global question of prisoner educa¬
tion and has set many standards and norms
in this field. UN action has focused on
inmates' basic human right to an education
designed to concentrate on their mental,
physical, social and spiritual development. Its
framework has been the Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cul¬
tural Rights, whose signatories recognize
"the right of everyone to education" and
that education shall be geared to "the full
development of the human personality".
The UN has adopted several sets of pris¬
oner education standards. The most impor¬
tant, the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners (1955), stipulates
that "provision shall be made for the further
education of all prisoners capable of profit¬
ing thereby", and that penal education
should be integrated "so far as practicable"
with each country's educational system.
Another set of principles, the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Administration of Juvenile Justice (The Bei¬
jing Rules) establishes standards on the
rights of juvenile offenders. Rule 26 stipu¬
lates that a juvenile penal education system
should help young people in institutions
"to assume socially constructive and pro¬
ductive roles in society". The focus is on the
"wholesome development" of young
offenders and on training to ensure that
they do not return to society at an "educa¬
tional disadvantage".
Significant new UN resolutions on
prison education were adopted in 1990,
including a recommendation that "all pris
oners have access to education, including
literacy programmes, basic education, voca¬
tional training, creative, religious and cul¬
tural activities, physical education and
sports, social education, higher education
and library facilities".
While UNESCO had previously said lit¬
tle on the specific subject of prisoner edu¬
cation at the international level, the Fourth
International Unesco Conference on
Adult Education (1985) adopted a decla¬
ration on the right to learn for all, which
consists of: a) the right to read and write;
b) the right to question and analyse; c) the
right to imagine and create; d) the right to
read about one's own world and to write
history; e) the right to have access to edu¬
cational resources; f) the right to develop
individual and collective skills. Like the
human rights articulated by the UN, these
UNESCO rights are considered fundamental,
with the goal of developing the whole per¬
sonality. This means that prisoners should
be given access wherever possible to libraries,
laboratories, workshops, cultural events
and similar educational resources to develop
themselves to the fullest extent.
The Fifth International Conference on
Adult Education, organized by the
UNESCO Institute for Education in Ham¬
burg, 14-18 July 1997, adopted the Ham¬
burg Declaration on Adult Learning and
its accompanying Agenda for the Future
which sets out in detail UNESCO's new
commitment to adult learning. The Agenda
recognizes "the right to learn of all prison
inmates: a) By providing prison inmates
with information on and access to differ¬
ent levels of education and training; (b) By
developing and implementing comprehen-
" *: " ©
Street children in Tananarive, the capital of
Madagascar, where around 4,000 homeless
children between the ages of 2 and 18 survive by
begging and doing odd jobs. The non-governmental
humanitarian organization Doctors Without
Borders has been running a medical, social and
legal assistance programme to help them since
1993.
sive education programmes in prisons, with
the participation of inmates, to meet their
needs and learning aspirations; (c) By mak¬
ing it easier for non-governmental organi¬
zations, teachers and other providers of
educational activities to work in prisons,
thereby providing prisoners with access to
educational institutions and encouraging
initiatives that link courses carried out
inside and outside prisons."
For further information on the 1997 conference:
Internet:
http://www.education.unesco.org/confintea
