A fresh outlook 
UNESCO’s connexion with the men and women around the world whose role it is
to discove r , to think and to communicat e , to work with knowledge and ideas, is at
the heart of its activities. This is  an enormous—and awe s o m e — p ri v i l e g e , a n d
UNESCO’s perspective on our times,on its promises and its failures,is all the sharper
and more original because of it.
The sharpness is due to the quality of the information UNESCO gathers from
leading specialists in the vanguard of international research and development in a
wide range of disciplines.The originality stems from the convergence and confronta-
tion of all these flows of information, which create a momentum that transcends the
barriers between disciplines and the borders between states. This perspective is thus
universal in the sense that it is both planetary and all-embracing.
What does it reveal? The range of possibilities facing humankind is now wider
than ever before, largely because of advances in science and technology. The speed
and scope of this expansion have led to a threshold effect, a leap into the unknown.
The balance has been disrupted between the rhythm of time, the division of space,
the assimilation of new knowledge, the authority of institutions and the exercise of
that authority. We are faced with an existential choice. Either we rush headlong into
the future, managing these upheavals in an unimaginative, short-sighted fashion. Or
else we acquire together the means to become informed, to analyse, discuss and eva-
luate the advantages and drawbacks of the possibilities available to us, before deci-
ding how we can move towards a future in
which everyone can benefit equitably and
thus peacefully from this immense stock of
knowledge.
In the twentieth century, physics and
chemistry made tremendous strides. Their
success brought abundant energy and made
it possible to manufacture countless pro-
ducts that have become invaluable in fields
ranging from medicine to telecommunications. In the twenty-first century, biology
and information technology will continue to advance and interact. As a consequen-
ce, far greater resources will be produced, for health care and agriculture, for
example.Humanity will also find it possible to accelerate or alter natural changes and
even to produce the genetic material of an “artificial nature” resulting from human
willpower and imagination.
But to what end? Is humankind engaged in a grand design, a common purpose?
Today, distances are shrinking, frontiers are disappearing and national sovereignty is
crumbling, yet there are no signs of the emergence of the twenty-first century’s pla-
netary agora, where such a design could be freely shaped, accepted and applied.
For now, the law of the survival of the fittest still prevails. Power lies in the hands
of those who combine possession of the most advanced knowledge with massive
resources. Walls are going up across the planet as well as within each nation. They
divide actors from spectators, subjects from objects, haves from have-nots in every
sphere of politics, economics, society, culture and education.
UNESCO has the privilege to receive this contradictory message, which holds out
tremendous hopes and warns of terrible dangers. It also has the duty to reflect it
accurately and spread it widely.The UNESCO Courier has always contributed to this
process. Its new format, the first issue of which you are now reading, remains faith-
ful to the magazine’s original purpose of presenting information and viewpoints from
leading world specialists. But it also breaks new ground as it seeks to provide livelier
coverage of the crucial issues of our time, and bring our ideals of peace, justice and
freedom closer to our readers. We hope that the Courier will stimulate you to think
anew about the world. ■
Federico Mayor
The range of possibilities facing 
humankind is now wider than ever before,
largely because of advances in science 
and technology.
