Pe a c e Photos by Sérgio Santimano
in Mozambique
* Mozambican poet
The question and the p e o p l e
Luis Carlos Patraquim*
■
After the troubles and the wars, what keeps the people moving? The people moves
towards its inner self, tracing the circle of its identity on the soil, says the old man
sitting in the shade of the tall tree. He knows many stories.
Is the people never still,does it always run like the graceful gazelle or like the swift and voracious
leopard?
No.The people dances in the bosom of time.



And why is there a people?
That’s not a question to ask the people, says the old man,laughing.
A school at Ibo, in Mozambique’s Cabo Delgado province.
Enigmatic questions and oracular responses in an imaginary dialogue
between a stranger and an old man of the people

He rises and languidly stretches himself. He knows many stori e s.When the women return
from the river carrying buckets full of water on their heads, they put leaves on the quive-
ring surface.If they don’t,the water spills. But does it really spill?
The water falls and runs down their faces, wets their breasts and leaves glistening drops on their
arms.That’s not right.The women must carry themselves properly.They cannot become water.
The old man sits down again. He is very patient,he concentrates on the questions,puffs
on his rosewood pipe. His feet are cracked and chapped in his sandals, t h at is why he
knows many stories.
But why is this old man sitting alone under the tall tree with his smoke and his patience?
The old man is always alone.The people is always alone, he answers, without sighing deeply,
without a grave voice,without anything.
Should the people always be a mystery?
The mystery of the people is that it exists.
And stays seated beneath the tall tree?
No!
He is almost angry, this seated old man.Is the people waiting for something?


God of day and night;Spirit that lives in the tree trunk and flies between the roots and the mane
of fo l i a ge ;you who have seen the wind of blood like a ri ver with the people in it,and the lake cat c h
fire and the cry of women suddenly dried up, tell me,where do these questions come from? asks the
old man anxiously.
Question,I am thirsty.Bring me that gourd,the one over there,with the wide mouth!
He leans over the water avidly and cups his hands to drink.
Liquid fabric, do not stop dancing, or I will return from my blindness,although I no longer want
to see memory. It is where I put my silence,and now I utter other words.
He sighs.
That question sounds like a hyena bursting into laughter.
The old man rises and starts to walk around the tree.There are many stories around the
trunk:a leopard skin, a woman’s full stomach, masks and drums, a blood-stained spear,
a burnt sculpture,a cross,a fez, a book and a Kalashnikov, frayed linen, a flag.
T h at question is a spirit that besieges me with my own things, s ays the old man, c a l m e r. He sits
down again.
I am those things. Now, I can look at them again.Everything I felt on the circle and on the tree
trunk,all the blood I have wept,everything I have done in the dark lake,spilling my thick milk,
The water falls and runs
down their faces, wets
their breasts and leaves
glistening drops on their
arms. The women must
carry themselves properly.
They cannot become water.

Bamako Biennial
Photos taken by the Mozambican photographer Sér-
gio Santimano in Mozambique’s Cabo Delgado pro-
vince are one of the highlights of the third Bamako Bien-
n i a l ,A f r i c a ’s foremost photography event, which is being
held in Mali’s capital from 3 to 12 December 1998.
Officially entitled “Rencontres de la Photographie
A f r i c a i n e ” , the Biennial is presenting a panorama of
daily life and festivities in Africa, ranging from boxing
matches in Ghana to Ramadan rituals in Tu n i s i a . Th e
official selection presents the works of such leading pho-
t o g raphers as Philip Kwame A p a g ya (Ghana), Felix Diallo
( M a l i ) , Omar D. ( A l g e r i a ) , Nabil Mahdaoui (Morocco)
and Ananias Dago, a young photographer from Côte
d ’ I v o i r e. In addition to the official selection, group shows
will present family archives from South Africa and A f r i c a
as seen from Paris (in collaboration with the Maison
Européenne de la Photographie). ■

the mask of my rites and my fears, the cry with which I disemboweled men while taking my life,
the cycle of rain and the word spoken of old,all that is me.Q u e s t i o n , I order you to sit down beside
me! Don’t you see the night coming on,like a woman kneeling in front of you,her fetishes on her
belly,her language of water?
H ow can I rest at night, if only ye s t e r d ay I was rowing on the ri ver of the dead, if I put ani-
mals to flight to come as far as this?
How did you know I was sitting beneath this tree?
I was told that there was a tree at the edge of a plat e a u , and that where there is a tree, a sea-
ted man is waiting.I was told that this man had other questions for me.
The old man’s bursts of laughter ring through the darkness.
Is that all?
I do not know how to answer you.I will simply tell you that I have crossed the centuries
and that I stopped at several places,with their vo i c e s , their time that was coming or dying,
and what the voices said,and it was always something else and the same thing.It always
ended with a question.



And that question was the people?
That is what I am asking you.I heard choirs that announced that chaos was coming, but

that afterwards an order,an original principle,would descend.Once,I was troubled by a
c h i l d r e n ’s song. I looked in librari e s , in the many stories of old men like yo u .Another time,
someone who crossed my path spoke of a labyrinth and a circle.When I asked him to draw
them for me on the ground because I needed to see, t h at face or that voice whose feat u r e s
and pitch I can no longer even describe, vanished,and I have only this memory:not kno-
wing what I saw or heard.When I lost hope,I knew you existed.
A man sitting beneath a tree at the edge of the plateau?
Yes.
Is that all?
Yes. . . and that he knew many stories.
And which stories did you want to know?
That question leaves me baffled.
Do you remember that I asked you to sit down next to me and not in front of me? Accept my invi-
tation.
That way, we both look at the same thing! The old man bursts into laughter yet again.
Why didn’t you write “another time”? It’s as if you were taking a kind of photograph.You would
be an accomplice. . . .

I don’t understand your question.



After the troubles and the wars, what keeps the people moving?
The people moves towards its inner self, tracing the circle of its identity.
Is the people never still,does it always run like the graceful gazelle or the leopard,swift and vora-
cious?
No.The people dances in the bosom of time.
And why is there a people?
That’s not a question to ask the people.And why did you use a comma when speaking of
the leopard?
Swift and voracious?
Yes.
Because we are both sitting down and looking at each other.And because now,t h at comma is part
of my knowledge.
Like a breath in time. ■
Maputo
Beira
Ibo
TANZANIA
Cabo
Delgado
Niassa
Nampula
Zambezira
Sofala
Gaza
Maputo
Tete
MALAWI
ZAMBIA
SOUTH
AFRICA
SWAZILAND
ZIMBABWE
Indian Ocean
