directed towards industrial applicat i o n s , at the
expense of basic research.To d ay, they are shifting the
balance of their strat e g y. In Europe, the United
Kingdom was the first country to encourage the ri s e
of industrial research. Even France, which places
very strong emphasis on basic research, is going
down that road.
Might this change in focus not be harmful in the
long run?
Nowadays,a country’s economic performance
depends more than ever on its capacity to innovat e .
Research is adapting to this world trend and is
being harnessed to the economy. But gove rn m e n t s ,
especially in North America, have become aware
t h at they cannot neglect basic research. In the short
term, applied research undoubtedly leads to tech-
nological innovation.But in the long run,without
the reservoir of knowledge produced by basic
r e s e a r c h ,i n n ovation breaks dow n .E ven corp o r at i o n s
h ave made a commitment to basic research, w h i c h
until now was conducted in public-sector labora-
t o ries funded by the stat e .To create new products,
they need scientists capable of understanding what
is going on in the public sector, building relations
with that sector and drawing on its results.
Today, the problem no longer lies in deciding
whether basic or applied research should be the
p ri o ri t y, but in striking a balance between them, d i s-
tributing tasks and organizing exchanges between
universities and the corporate world. Many coun-
t ries are experimenting with these issues and looking
for solutions. France encourages gr a d u ate students
to work with corp o r ations and public-sector resear-
c h e rs to set up their own bu s i n e s s e s. Japan is urgi n g
academics to patent their breakthroughs in order to
profit from them and to co-operate more closely
with pri vate industry, which used to be considered
as a comedown. n
Interview by Sophie Boukhari
UNESCO’s World Science Report describes 
three main models for conducting and funding
scientific research. What’s your thinking 
about this?
There certainly are three major models. By and
l a r g e , Japan invests ve ry little in defence, a n d
industry still dominates research. Europe empha-
sizes basic civil research and the United States puts
more stress on military research. But the three
models are converging.
How did these “models” develop and why are they
converging?
As far back as the late 19th century, Japan
focused on applied science to catch up with the
West. After the Second World War, all the major
i n d u s t rialized countries made massive inve s t-
ments in basic research, which they considered
the driving force behind progress. Japan couldn’t
afford such a luxury at that time. But once it
became a world power, it realized that it could
produce itself the knowledge that gives rise to
t e c h n o l o gical innovat i o n . In the 1970s, t h e
government began investing more in research,
almost 80 per cent of which was financed by the
private sector. In 1995, it earmarked some $140
billion for research over a five-year period (1995-
2000). The primary goal is to strengthen public
institutions and basic research.
Europe and the United States have moved in
the opposite direction. After the Second World
War, they went for pure research. Their econo-
mies were flourishing. The prevailing ideology
suggested that science would bring economic and
social progress. In the 1970s, those countries
became aware that basic research, which is very
expensive, was not always profitable in the short
term.And Japan’s example showed that economic
growth was not necessarily linked to investment
in pure research.
After the Cold War, the United States curbed
their military budget and went all-out on research * Observatory of Sciences and Technology, France
Public 
( c i v i l )
Military
Industry
European Union United States Japan
1990 1994 1990 1994 1990 1994
36.2 39 18.5 18.6 25.4 25.5
52.3 52.8 50.6 59 73.1 73.4
11.5 8.2
30.9
22.4 1.5 1.1



Financing of R&D in the ‘big three’ (%)
A c c o rding to Japanese re s e a rcher Yo s h i ko Okubo*, E u ro p e a n ,A m e r i c a n
and Japanese re s e a rch policies are converg i n g
T h e big three get together
