U k ra i n e : legal e a g l e s
with clipped wings 
w Serhiy Holova t y
U k raine embarked on a far- reaching legal reform pro g ra m m e, but found that old habits die
h a rd in an entrenched n o m e n k l a t u r a. B e l o w, the viewpoint of a former Minister of Ju s t i c e
Shedding 350 ye a rs of colonial serv i t u d e
when it became a state eight years ago,
Ukraine has confronted enormous difficul-
ties in establishing the institutions of democracy,
including a rule of law.
In 1995 Ukraine became a member of the
Council of Europe, voluntarily taking upon itself
to fulfil obligations concerning the adoption of a
new democratic constitution, the drafting of new
civil and criminal codes, the reform of the judi-
ciary and the harmonizing of its legislation with
European norms and standards of human rights
and freedoms. In June 1996, the passage of a
constitution expressing Ukraine’s desire to build
a rule of law was hailed by the Council of Europe.
Yet on the whole there is less democracy in
Ukraine today than there was four ye a rs ago.
Ukraine is in default of its obligations under the
t e rms of its accession to the Council of Europe, t h e
j u d i c i a ry generally remains corrupt and ineffic i e n t ,
e xe c u t i ve and legi s l at i ve intransigence have left ini-
t i at i ves with respect to Ukraine’s commitments
suspended in a legi s l at i ve purgat o ry, and corru p-
tion is rampant in Ukraine’s public administrat i o n .
As a result, Ukrainian society’s view of the law is
marked by cynicism and scepticism.
Soviet legacy
The genesis of the problem lies in the legacy of
S oviet rule and the monopoly of state power in
Ukrainian society. S oviet era elites retained powe r
after independence and now continue to wield tre-
mendous administrat i ve control over the lives of
c i t i z e n s.To d ay they ove rsee the unbridled distri bu-
tion of state propert y, and exercise control ove r
most economic activity, resulting in widespread
institutional corru p t i o n .They have expanded their
p ower by establishing new administrat i ve bodies to
r e g u l ate the pri vate sector and citizens’ p ri vate acti-
vities through the imposition of licences, q u o t a s
and other controls. With institutions of civil socie-
ty too weak to hold them to account, the gove rn i n g
n o m e n k l at u ra has no incentive to promote signifi-
cant democrat i c, especially legal, r ef o rms so long as
its members continue to be the principal benefic i a-
ries of the existing system.
In 1995, I as Minister of Justice designed a
reform programme in line with the principles of
the Council of Europe and the provisions of
Ukraine’s constitution.Our key objectives were to
have the ministry of justice take the leading role
in the administration of justice in the country, to
promote and secure individual human rights and
freedoms, to create a market-oriented legal infra-
structure, and generally to incorporate transpa-
rency and openness in the legal system.
A comprehensive legal reform programme
was undertaken, involving everything from the
rights of the accused upon detention and arrest,
to the principle of an accused’s innocence until
guilt is proven.
‘Clean hands’
to wipe out corruption
But weak governance has allowed corruption
to flourish.It has resulted in the emergence of the
present machinery of government where respon-
sibilities overlap and accountabilities are diffuse,
in ministerial ownership of commercial activities
and associated conflicts of interest, in the low pay
and poor supervision of civil servants and in the
lack of a public service ethos in the civil service.
Changing the prevailing mentality from a com-
mand approach to public administration to an
w A member of parliament and
former Ukrainian Minister of
Justice, Serhiy Holovaty is president
of the Ukrainian Legal Foundation,
which was founded in 1992 to
work towards the establishment of
the rule of law in Ukraine.
U K R A I N E
Kiev
Romania
Poland
Belarus
Black Sea
Sea 
of Azov
Russia

approach based on a transparent, accountable
public service is a daunting task.
The ministry of justice undertook concrete
measures to bring the issues of transparency and
accountability in government to public attention.
In April 1997, the President of Ukraine adopted
a “National Programme against Corruption”,
popularly referred to as the “Clean Hands” cam-
paign, developed by the ministry. This program-
me proposed a systemic approach to the problem
of corru p t i o n , including legi s l at i ve initiat i ve s ,
deregulation of the economy, and the reform of
public administration to make it more accoun-
table and transparent.
Judges under threat
The ministry ’s reform efforts were ve h e m e n t l y
resisted by the entrenched n o m e n k l at u ra in gove rn-
ment and the judiciary, largely by implementing
the programme to the minimum necessary extent,
then claiming that it had been carried out.
The problem of building an independent judi-
ciary proved particularly acute. Today’s judges
still carry the burden of Soviet traditions, when
the judiciary often acted in tandem with prosecu-
tors and communist party officials to suppress the
rights of individuals. They are under-trained and
so poorly paid that they are largely at the mercy
of threats and bribes from the political and admi-
nistrative authorities over which they should be
exercising control. It is common for judges to
receive threats from local authorities to cut off
electricity, gas and heat if “appropriate” decisions
are not rendered. Both the public and the judicia-
ry remain ignorant of the citizens’ constitutional
rights to be protected from official interference in
the judicial process. Efforts to establish a legal
basis for a market economy have not met with
greater success.
Indeed, most citizens of Ukraine are alarmin-
gly resigned to the status quo, and do not yet
appreciate, let alone insist upon, the enforcement
of the rights they now possess. Thus, reform of
the legal system is hampered by a collective
memory of the use of the law by state authorities
as an instrument of oppression, and not as the
handmaiden of individual liberty.
This situation is compounded by the state of
the legal profession. Numerous attempts have fai-
led over the past few years to establish a profes-
sional, self-governing law society which would
ensure the protection of the rights of citizens and
the provision of quality legal services. The prima-
ry impediment to the realization of this goal is
that Ukraine today still possesses a legal culture
where lawyers are seen, and see themselves, as
servants of the state. Most law school graduates
still seek employment in law enforcement bodies
or in government agencies.
Stalinist forces
on the prowl
The prokuratura—established by Stalin as a
completely autonomous law enforcement body
with extensive powers of supervision over all
levels of government and administration, and
powers to initiate actions in criminal matters—
continues to perform many of its Soviet-era func-
tions, including supervision over judicial deci-
sions. Even though under Council of Europe
obligations that are incorporated in the constitu-
tion, the prokuratura was to have shed its Stalinist
responsibilities, its investigative powers have been
expanded. After a brief attempt at reform, the
State Security Service, the SBU, is once again
performing many of the functions of its predeces-
sor, the KGB. With some exceptions, the legal
profession has largely been silent and ineffective
in safeguarding citizens against these and other
abuses of their rights.
To turn this situation around requires the emer-
gence of a new legal culture based on the pri n c i p l e s
of the rule of law set out in the constitution.T h e s e
p r ovide for a new relationship between the indivi-
dual and the stat e , whereby the state undertakes to
f o s t e r , p r e s e rve and protect the human rights and
freedoms of the individual. R e a l i z ation of these
o b j e c t i ves requires an understanding of what the
constitutional rights of the Ukrainian citizen mean
and how they should be applied.
This is fundamentally the responsibility of
Ukraine’s law schools. And here they are failing
miserably. They remain fundamentally conserva-
tive. Educators continue to teach that the law is
an instrument of sanction by the government,
and not an instrument to protect the rights of citi-
zens against the excesses of the stat e . T h e
Ukrainian Legal Foundation has made a start
towards the creation of a new law school along
the European model by founding the Ukrainian
Centre for Legal Studies, which teaches human
rights and market-oriented commercial law. n
A July 1997 demonstration of Kiev tradespeople demanding tax reductions and measures
against bureaucratic corruption.
