If a scientific discovery can form the basis of a technology, then it is highly pro-
bable that the technology will eventually be applied. Today this lesson of his-
tory is causing anxiety among politicians,scientists and public opinion concer-
ned about the current far-reaching developments in biotechnologies.
It is now possible to penetrate to the very essence of living things as a result of
spectacular scientific advances that are gradually revealing the innermost mecha-
nisms of life.The technologies based on this field of knowledge offer humanity for
the first time astonishing powers to revolutionize the process of creating and deve-
loping human beings and, ultimately, the human species. Technically speaking,
these breakthroughs could lead to the revival,in even more effective guises,of euge-
nic practices we hoped had been buried forever. Fortunately, this nightmare sce-
nario seems highly unlikely.
But history also shows that new technologies are rarely applied without a fra-
mework of rules and procedures designed to ensure that they are beneficially used.
Human progress has always been driven by the winds of freedom, including free-
dom of enquiry and initiative, but human beings have always tried to head in the
right direction and to respect certain limits. The biologists have done their work:
they have sown the seeds of vast possibilities. Now it is up to society to make sure
that only the benefits are harvested.The biotechnology revolution beckons huma-
nity to a crucial encounter between science and ethics.
Where human reproduction is concerned, as with technology in general, we
must be guided by respect for three basic and interdependent principles—dignity,
freedom and solidarity.
For human dignity to be respected, each person must be regarded as unique.
This position has far-reaching consequences for human procreat i o n . F i rst of all, i t
rules out cloning as a means of reproduction because this technique, which is
almost upon us, i nvo l ves genetically “ d u p l i c at i n g ” an existing pers o n . More gene-
r a l l y, p r e d e t e rmining the basic characteristics of a future pers o n , notably trying to
enhance their future physical or mental capacities, v i o l ates the ve ry essence of
human individuality. This kind of engi n e e ring would end up by depriving indivi-
duals of that which is theirs alone—the my s t e rious processes whereby their unique
genetic heritage emerges and interacts in its own unique way with their env i r o n-
m e n t .
Advances in prenatal scanning and testing techniques may confront parents
with grave new decisions. The danger is that various kinds of pressures or even
regulations will develop which only allow “genetically correct” people to be born.
This would be totally unacceptable. No authority—be it political, social or econo-
mic—should be able to enact such a “genetic order”, still less impose it.
So increasing emphasis must be laid on solidarity. Genetic tests and treatments
must not be allowed to create new forms of discrimination—between those who,
for whatever reason, can or want to take advantage of them,and those who cannot,
mostly for lack of money.
The risk of uncontrolled, unmonitored genetic engineering increasingly looms
over us. But we are starting to see the emergence of a new “responsible” form of
genetic engineering in which the power of science is subjected to the power of
ethics—an ethics that benefits everyone, not just a few, and looks towards future
generations, not just short-term interests. n
Federico Mayor
Genetic tests
and treatments
must not be
a l l o w e d
to create new
forms of
d i s c r i m i n a t i o n —
b e tween those
who, for whatever
reason, can or
want to ta ke
a d v a n tage of them,
and those who
cannot, mostly for
lack of money
A CRUCIAL ENCOUN T ER
