w Photos on pages 3-8 are taken from Avoir 20 ans à
La Havane, by Grégoire Korganow and Jean Springer,
published by Editions Alternatives, Paris, 1998. Antonio
José Ponte is a Cuban writer and poet (see page 6).

Spend an evening in Havana or some
other Cuban town such as Matanzas
or Pinar del Río and you get the fee-
ling time is at a standstill. The past slips
away, and the future is a long time
coming, so you are left stuck in the pre-
sent. To be 20 years old in Cuba is to be
20 years old for ever. It is either a won-
derful gift or a refined form of torment.
The choice is yours.
Twenty is an age when you most feel



F OREV ER TW EN TY
IN CUBA 
wPhotos by Grégoire Korganow
Text by Antonio José Ponte
Cuba’s young men and women in a hurry face up to a frustrating situation
where time seems to stand still
A bride at her parents’ home, just before a Havana wedding. The divorce rate in Cuba is high, and it is not uncommon 
for Cubans to marry three or four times.
the immensity of time.Young people have
m a ny hopes, but they are quickly
betrayed. After three or four dreams have
come to nothing, those that are left seem
vain. Impatience makes you see every-
thing that happens in the same way. You
h ave n ’t yet learned the adult art of
concealing boredom.
Asking young Cubans about the futu-
re, or—to put it more bluntly—about
their destiny, is like asking them for a false
address.They’ll say they’ve never heard of
it, that it doesn’t exist.The shrewdest of
them will say that the future is elsewhere,
not here.
When yo u ’re 20, you want to be
somewhere else, far away. Perhaps most
20-year-olds feel like that, all over the
world. They certainly do in Cuba. The
capital and provincial towns and villages
are full—crowded and empty at the same
time—of things that signify nothing.
You’re at the ideal age to enter a new
world, but you find the world around you
has already been taken over by others who
got there before you.
It isn’t possible to create anything new
in a country at the end of its history.
Revolutions come to power to make sure
t h at gove rnments stand still, on the

Atlantic Ocean
Caribbean Sea
grounds that there have already been
enough changes in the country’s history.
When you are young, you tend to look
for things that have not been fouled up by
earlier generations, things that they did
not know about and so are untainted by
their approval.
Fed up with provincial life, people can
set their sights on moving to Havana,
while people tired of Havana will want to
leave the country. Afterwards, often when
it’s impossible to return, they will want to
be back in Havana, or in some provincial
town or village.The reason for such wan-
derings is partly biological, partly politi-
cal. Or rather totally biological and total-
ly political, if we accept that in cities
human biology has become political.
A thirst for adventure
The Cuban government has often mana-
ged to turn this desire to escape to its own
advantage.Taking part in other countries’
wars, compulsory military service, schoo-
ling organized in the fields,and the mobi-
lization of teenagers all exploit this need
to leave home and slake a thirst for adven-
t u r e . These are children’s cru s a d e s ,
exceptional intervals in the preva i l i n g
stagnation.
Many are set on leaving—the youth
When Christopher Columbus landed on the
island of Cuba in 1492, he wrote in his tra v e l
d i a ry that he had come across “the most beautiful
land ever seen by human eyes”. Today the 110 , 8 6 0 -
sq.km island, the biggest in the Caribbean, has a
population of about 11 million, more than half of
them of mixed blood. One fifth of the population live
in the capital, Havana.
HAVANA
Mexico
United States of America
Bahamas
Haiti
Jamaica
Pinar del Río
Nueva Gerona
La Juventud
Cienfuegos
Sancti-Spiritus
Victoria de las Tunas
Santiago de Cuba
Holguin
Guantanamo
Bayaamo
Matanzas
Santa Clara
Ciego de Avila
Camagüey
who builds a raft and sneaks out of the
country on it, those who try their luck in
the U.S. immigration lottery, or sell their
bodies to foreigners in the hope of getting
help to leave the country. For people who
live in the unending present, the best ploy
is to saturate each moment with activity,
until it gives way to the next. You can call
that joie de vivre or a horror of the void—
take your pick. Young people in Cuba are
full of both.
A social experiment like the 1959
revolution,which has spent so many years
defying the basic laws of economics,
which imposes austerity as a way of thin-
king and poverty as a daily routine, is
A sugarcane processing plant near Cienfuegos in central Cuba. Before its collapse, the USSR bought on
preferential terms almost half Cuba’s sugar harvest, which then amounted to some 7 million tons a year. The
yield fell to 3.2 million tons in 1998.
Since the 19 59 revolution, Cuba has been a com-
munist state headed by Fidel Castro who, as well as
being president is chairman of the Council of State
and the Council of Ministers, first secretary of the
Cuban Communist Party (the only permitted party)
and commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
Education and health care for all have been two
of the pillars of the revolution for the past 40 years.
As a result, Cubans have a level of litera cy only sur-
passed in Latin America by Argentina and Uru-
guay, and the region’s highest life expectancy (76 .1
years). 
Several hundred Cuban doctors are presently
working outside the country. The tradition of sen-
ding doctors abroad started soon after the revolu-
tion began and peaked between 1975 and 1989.
In the early 1990s, the collapse of the commu-
nist bloc plunged Cuba into a serious economic
crisis. According to the Cuban government, the
island’s gross national product (GNP) fell by 35%
b e tween 1989 and 1993, and then rose by 2.5% in
1995, 7.8% in 1996 and 2.5% in 19 97. According to
United Nations statistics, Cuba’s per capita GNP was
$ 1,983 in 1995. Castro has cautiously opened up the
country to foreign capital, allowed the free circu-
lation of the U.S. dollar, and encouraged the deve-
lopment of tourism. These changes have led to
the reappearance of social problems such as pros-
titution and petty crime which had been era d i-
cated or had become insignificant.
In the political sphere, the one-party system
continues to exist, the independent media cannot
develop, and international human rights organi-
zations deplore the way dissidents are treated. 
An estimated one million Cubans are thought to live
in exile.  n

Tobacco is dried after being harvested near Pinar del Rio (in the west of the island). Cuba produced more than 160 million Havana cigars in 1998 and exported them to
around 100 countries. The USA, Cuba’s main customer before the revolution, still maintains a trade embargo on Cuban goods, including the famous cigars.
Sugarcane cutters near Santiago in southern Cuba. Sugar is white, brown and black—like Cuba’s population since the time of the slave trade, 
say the poets.

CUBA’S NEW WAV E
OF WRI T ERS AND POET S
The poet and short story writer Antonio José
Ponte was born in 1964 in Matanzas, about
100km east of Havana, and in 1980 moved to the
Cuban capital where he studied hydraulics. After
qualifying he worked as a hydraulic engineer for
five years.
He has won Cuba’s National Critics’ Prize
twice—in 1991 for Poesia 1982-1989 (“Poetry
19 8 2 - 1989”, published by Le t ras Cubanas,
Havana) and in 1995 for his book Un seguidor de
M o n t a i gne mira La Habana ( “A disciple of
Montaigne looks at Havana”, published by Vigia,
Matanzas). In 1995, he was awarded a writer’s
scholarship by the Alejo Carpentier Foundation
in Havana. His first book, Trece poemas
(“Thirteen Poems”) was published in 1988 by the
Cuban ministry of culture and won him the
young poet’s prize in the same year.
In 1997, he published Asiento en las ruinas (“A
Seat in the Ruins”, Le t ras Cubanas publishers) and
a short story, C o razón de Skitalietz (“Heart of 
S k i t a l i e tz”). His latest book, Las comidas pro f u n d a s
(“Profound sustenance”), was published in
Spanish in 1997 by the French publisher Deleatur,
in Angers. This elegant and scholarly work, which
is hard to categorize (it is neither a short story, nor
an essay nor a novel) deals with the history of food
and the relationship between human beings and
what they eat.
The International Writers’ Parliament in Stras-
bourg recently awarded Ponte a one-year scholar-
ship to live in Porto, Portugal, and write a novel.
While in Portugal he will continue to contribute to
the Cuban magazines La Gaceta de Cuba, Union
(the magazine of the Cuban Writers’ and Artists’
Union, UNEAC), Casas de las Americas and Le t ra s
Cubanas.
At 34, Ponte is one of the new wave of young
Cuban poets and writers, including Le o n a r d o
Pa d u ra, Abilio Estevez, Ronaldo Menendez Pla-
sencia, Daniel Diaz Mantilla, Ismael González, Ales-
sandra Molina and many others. n
bound to produce young people with an
outsized acquisitive instinct. To be 20 in
Cuba is to be obsessed with money. A
country where wages are paid in the
national currency but where you can only
live if you have foreign currency, incites
people to flee, to go to the place where
that currency comes from.
One might object that education will
e ventually change the situation of Cuban
yo u n g s t e rs. But teachers ’ lessons do not deal
with the real wo r l d .This is inevitable.Like all
e d u c at i o n , Cuban education teaches people
to aspire, to want certain things, to achieve
g o a l s. But these are verbs that cannot be
c o n j u g ated when time stands still, w h e n
there is a vo i d . If the yo u n g s t e rs happen to
get good training, it will simply equip them
to live far away, a b r o a d .
The equation boils down to shortages
on the one hand, and money and beauty
on the other. This is a discovery made at
20 which stays with you until the day you
sink into oblivion and death.
In Cuba, at 20, you discover another
r e a l i t y : the inability to run your own life, o r
to try to balance the two sides of the equa-
t i o n . But long before you reach 20,you dis-
cover that what’s lacking is freedom. n
After work in a rural school (escuela del campo) near Pinar del Rio in western Cuba. Secondary school pupils over the age of 12 attend such schools for two months
each year as a “social service in agriculture”.

Sunday on the beach, Santiago de Cuba.
The University of Havana. In 1995, 12.7% of young Cubans entered university, as against 20.1% in 1985. All children receive primary education and 94% reach the fifth
year of schooling. Three-quarters of young people from 12 to 17 are in school. Adult illiteracy is low.

A young couple and their child.
A Cuban rock singer rehearses in Havana. Young Cubans, like their elders, love music and dance. Fiesta time means salsa, timba, guaracha, mambo, rumba, rock,
techno, son, guajira, trova, danzón, bolero, and cha-cha-cha.
