61
WAR COMICS:
THE NEW REALISM
Comic strip authors today are tackling the horrors of war with a critical eye
n
August 1993. In shell-bat t e r e d
Sarajevo, three newborn babies, Nike
Hatzfeld, Leyla Mirkovic and Amir
Fa z l a gi c, are being fed with milk in
Kosevo Hospital. One is Croat, another
Serb and the third Muslim.But what does
that matter? All three of them have lost
their parents. They have come into a
world torn by suffering and they must
endure the same distress. They are chil-
dren of war.
w Spanish writer
Thirty-three years later, in 2026, their
paths cross again. They are now living in
a society where religious fundamentalism,
b i o l o gical manipulation and histori c a l
revisionism are the pillars of a system to
which they do not belong.They have lived
different lives, but their destinies have
been shaped by their common past, a
wound that refuses to heal.They are still
prisoners in a ruined hospital.
This is the story-line of Le sommeil du
m o n s t r e (“The Sleeping Monster”), a comic
book by the Yu g o s l av - b o rn French art i s t
Enki Bilal, published in 1998.Through its
richly textured narrative and drawing the
book broaches several key themes, i n c l u d i n g
the psychological impact of war. After the
rubble of wa r fare has been cleared away, t h e
emotional wounds remain, although they
are never mentioned by the military in their
c o m b at report s. Wa rs play havoc with
m e m o ries and feed our imagi n at i o n .F r o m
ancient times to today’s video games, war-
fare has been a common subject of fiction.
The “ p o e t i c s ” of destruction dominat e s
our my t h s , as a way of sublimating or exor-
cising violence. And comic strips are no
exception to the rule.
“To cry out in a city whose memory is filled with bombs and death is absurd,pathetic and pointless. . .” writes Enki Bilal in Le sommeil du monstre (“The Sleeping Monster”)
published by Les Humanoïdes Associés, Geneva,1998.
w Antonio Altarriba Ordoñez

A quick, superficial look at comic
books might gi ve the impression that
conflict is their dominant theme. Indeed,
some of the best-known series often turn
to fighting and brutality to resolve
conflicts. Some people think comic strips
are an invitation to aggressive behaviour,
even inciting people to violence. In fact,
the opposite is true these days. Some
comic books now contain sharp criticism
and lucid analysis of war. Gone are the
days when their pages were filled with war
propaganda.
Goodies 
and baddies
The 20th century has had its fill of
wa rs and hardly anywhere in the world has
been spared. H owe ve r , comic books deal
mainly with the Second World Wa r , w h i c h
has provided a seemingly inexhaustible
quantity of mat e ri a l . Trailing way behind
come the war in Viet Nam, the Korean
Wa r , the First World Wa r , the Spanish
Civil Wa r , the A l g e rian war of indepen-
dence and the Sino-Japanese wa r.
The setting is often the same: a land
devastated by explosions, burnt-out cities
and ravaged countryside. Only the geo-
graphical surroundings change. Through
impenetrable forests, across arid deserts,
frozen wastes or tropical islands, a soldier
makes his way, advancing or retreating
and observing the world around him.
With him, the reader can visit countrysi-
de which has either been spared mas-
sacres or has suffered their terrible conse-
quences. Most authors use a lot of back-
ground mat e rial and are scru p u l o u s
about details of history, weapons and uni-
forms. They know the credibility of their
story depends largely on such detail.
War is a subject that lends itself well to
a medium like comic books,just as adven-
tures and heroism often do. The charac-
ters frequently find themselves in extreme
situations. It is at such moments of great
tension, when the spectre of death looms
over the protagonists, that courage or
cowardice, self-assertion or trauma are
revealed. There’s no room for ambiguity
The characters in Hugo Pratt’s “Desert Scorpions”(1969),which is set in North Africa,feel no sense of patriotism. They are resigned to a situation they find revolting.Aware
that they are victims of interests beyond their control and caught up in the maelstrom of history, they try to make sense of their lives. In this state of general alienation,all
points of view are comprehensible—or at least justifiable. So soldiers of rival armies end up by fraternizing.As one of the characters puts it,real men have no flag.
“Stormtroopers”(1968),by the Italian artist Bonvi,is one of few comic strips to use war as a backcloth for humour. It deals with German soldiers in the Second World War
and replaces the usual stereotype of discipline and cruelty with one of stupidity and cowardice. Bonvi shows life on the sidelines of war, with troops more inclined to
malinger than to fight.He creates a theatre of the absurd with macabre overtones. The balloon in this frame reads:“Sergeant,I want you to tell the soldiers that when they
attend to their physical needs, they don’t have to stand to attention in the presence of an officer!”



The new authors criticize war by using humour,
attacking vested interests and analysing the psychology 
of the characters

on the battlefield. It’s a place of extreme
commitment and fierce loyalty to exem-
plary values and attitudes. Even today it
can still provide inspiration for epics.
Goodbye 
to propaganda
There are many kinds of comic strips
about war in which the characters per-
form heroic deeds in a sequence of adven-
tures. Although these stories explain nei-
ther the causes of the conflict nor the
interests at stake for each side, the beha-
viour of the characters makes very clear
who are the heroes and who are the vil-
lains. Pitted against tyranny, injustice and
appalling horrors are an almost reckless
courage and spirit of sacrifice. The two
sides may be engaged in a conflict bet-
ween different sets of values, but what
matters most is victory.
Over the years, this kind of one-sided
comic strip, typical of the 1940s and
1 9 5 0 s , has run out of steam. C o m i c
books have freed themselves from the
burden of propaganda and have become
more critical or analytical of people’s
behaviour.
They no longer rely exclusively on the
glorification of good guys and condemna-
tion of baddies. With the more relaxed
international atmosphere of recent years
and as the old conflicts fade into history,
“classic” war comic books are now rare. A
new readership has emerged, with a new
outlook dominated by a pacifist culture
The comic strip author who has gone deepest into the causes and effects of war is the Frenchman Jacques Tardi.In his comic book C’était la guerre des tranchées (“Trench
warfare”,1982),about the First World War, he deals bluntly with the stupidity of a civilian population which was swept along by a tide of patriotic fervour and supported the
fighting,and with the agony of a soldier living in a hell of blood and mud in the trenches. He shows the horror unleashed by officers who did not hesitate to sacrifice
thousands of men in the name of an absurd sense of honour. In this context,German soldiers are victims too. The only possible outcome is trauma, desertion or death.
and not much interested in stories that
praise patriotism or present the battlefield
as a theatre for courageous deeds and
heroic victories. Taking the opposite tack
to comic strips that peddle violent
conflict, the new authors criticize war by
using humour, attacking vested interests
and analysing the psychology of the cha-
racters. Among the most representative
figures of this trend are the Italians Hugo
Pratt and Bonvi, and the French artist
Jacques Tardi (see illustrations).
This kind of comic strip depicts sol-
diers who are paralysed with fear, know
little about the cause they are supposed to
be defending, and are mainly concerned
with trying to save their own skin.
Homesick, grief-stricken about their dead
comrades and horri fied by massacres,
they are also the victims of administrative
incompetence.The enemy rarely appears,
and when he does he’s depicted as a fel-
low unfortunate. In comic books of this
kind, the conflict is not a horizontal one
between two parties but a vertical one,
with a hierarchy obliging the soldiers to
defend interests that are not their own.
One example is a 1987 A m e ri c a n
series called The ’Nam (Viet Nam),whose
a u t h o rs , Michael Golden and Doug
Murray, presented a detailed and realistic
picture of the Viet Nam War. They told
the story of a group of U.S. marines who
d i d n ’t really understand why the wa r
began or what they were fighting for, and
who tried to get through it by making
friends with each other. More recently,
S a ra j e vo - Ta n go ( 1 9 9 6 ) , by the Belgi a n
cartoonist Hermann, revived the argu-
ment about getting involved in a war like
the one in Bosnia, where ethnic cleansing
happened because of the feeble diploma-
tic efforts of the United Nations and the
Western powers.
The most violent comic strips are
nearly always fantasies, with few historical
references. It is as if fantasy can soften the
cruelty of the scenes or at least set them
in a fictional context where there are
f e wer ethical requirements. But when
strips have a historical conflict as a back-
drop, authors these days are extremely
critical. Even when the story is set in the
midst of a conflict, a u t h o rs like the
Slovene Tomas Lavric in his “Tales of
Bosnia” (1997) avoid warlike postures.
Lavric recounts how, despite the war, eve-
ryday life goes on, with children playing
amid the snipers, old people looking for
pigeons to feed, politicians putting their
p e rsonal interests first and journ a l i s t s
trying to exploit the media possibilities of
disaster. The message is that in general,
war should always be condemned, whate-
ver its causes or aims.
The historical accuracy of the comic
books cited here, along with others such as
La guerra civil española (“The Spanish Civil
Wa r ” , 1978) by Antonio Hern á n d e z
Palacios, provides a reliable and congenial
basis for studying history in schools. Pala-
c i o s ’s four-part series is scru p u l o u s l y

d o c u m e n t e d . Through the lives of two
young men, E l oy and Gorka, r e a d e rs can see
a faithful depiction of the main actors in the
war,a reconstruction of some of the major
battles, the reasons for many troop move-
m e n t s , and especially the circumstances,
the country s i d e , the dress and the eve ry d ay
objects used in a Spain mired in poverty,
where no holds were barred in the stru g g l e
to survive constant danger.
Classroom 
exercises
The opportunity to draw lessons from
these comic books arises not so much
from the pictorial reconstruction of the
conflict as from their approach and the
way problems are presented. S o l d i e rs
handle weapons, but ideas justify what
they do.The authors present a wide range
of opinions which can be analysed and
assessed in the classroom. One exercise
could invo l ve asking the children to
explain why the characters in the comic
strip behave as they do and to compare
each side’s motives with those of their
adversaries. The children could then go
on to discuss whether these differences
were worth fighting over.
Of course, such situations can only be
explained in a historical context. It might
also be useful to make the victors and the
d e f e ated switch sides so as to see, by reshuf-
Comic strips produced in a number of countries present a biased version of conflicts. One notable example can be
found in Chinese comic books of the 1950s and 1960s. With huge print runs and wide distribution,they spread a
deceptive view of communist war and revolution
