The 1960s and 1970s marked the
b e ginning of profound changes in
family structures in the United Stat e s.
As the population became more mobile,
many parents raised children without sup-
p o rt from the extended fa m i l y. D i vo r c e
rates rose,and so did the numbers of chil-
dren raised in single-parent households
and/or by parents working outside the
home.In the 1970s few mothers of infants
worked outside the home; now more than
half do.
Today a quarter of American families
with children under age three live in pove rt y.
Most of them are headed by one parent,
usually the mother, and many live in unsafe
neighbourhoods with poor access to quality
child care and health serv i c e s.To help ease
PARADING FOR HOPE. Focus: Hope, a
movement created in Detroit in the
aftermath of the city’s 1967 race riots,
holds an annual eight-mile walk for
justice which brings people together on
the birthday of deceased black rights
leader Martin Luther King Jr to
demonstrate their commitment to
interracial harmony. The movement is
working to rebuild the manufacturing
base of inner-city Detroit, and runs a
Center for Advanced Technologies (CAT)
in partnership with six universities and
industrial partners including Ford and
General Motors.
the plight of these fa m i l i e s , hundreds of
grassroots family support programmes have
sprouted across the United States over the
last 25 ye a rs , coalescing into a movement of
growing size and complexity.
The activities of a handful of these com-
munity-based schemes are illustrated on
these pages. All of them are locally ru n ,
with the participation of volunteers. They
encourage education and the work ethic,
promote economic development, rehabili-
t ate housing and fight cri m e .M a ny of them
work closely with local religious institu-
tions, and most are involved with the local
school—backing up teachers in the class-
room,providing after-school care, organi-
zing summer progr a m m e s , and making sure
students get to school safely.



United States R a l l y i n g
to a new b e a t
Photos by Stephen Shames

PREPARING FOR LIFT-OFF. These elementary
school students in Denver, Colorado, are
members of a Rocket Club sponsored by
the US National Society of Black
Engineers, a college and university
student organization.Their school is one
of several Family Resource Schools in
Denver which are open after school
hours and on weekends as community
centres offering adult basic education,
parenting education and family 
support services.
* Pursuing the Dream:What Helps Children and
Their Families Succeed, by Stephen Shames
(photographer) and Kathy Goetz Wolf, Family
Resource Coalition of America, 1997.
The photos are a small selection of
m a ny taken over a three-year period by
p h o t o j o u rnalist Stephen Shames, who tra-
velled through 15 States and the District of
Columbia meeting disadvantaged families
and reporting on how they are being helped
to triumph over terrible odds to stay toge-
ther and become self-reliant. In 1997 they
were published in a book by the Fa m i l y
Resource Coalition of America*. n

AMERICAN GRAFFITI. Roy Panton paints over graffiti on Third Street,
Los Angeles. He is a member of Bresee Youth Center, an after-
school centre for youths aged 11-18, which has a contract with the
city to paint out graffiti in an area with the highest gang-related
crime rate in Los Angeles and few parks or recreational facilities.
One thousand kids from central LA participate, two-thirds of them
boys. Fifty-five per cent are African-American, 42 per cent are
Latino. The Center employs former graffiti artists in a computer
design and desktop publishing business, and other children work
distributing flyers, in the computer lab, or at the Center’s store. At
a homework lab, volunteer mentors and peer tutors help students
with reading, writing and math skills.
+ …
l 14% of the US population was living below
the poverty line* in 1994
l More than 20% of the aged are income-poor
l 59% of children in income-poor households
were in one-parent families (1989-92)
l 4% of the population not expected to survive
to age 40 (1990)
l 11% of secondary-school-age children not
enrolled in school (1993-95)
l Real per capita GDP of poorest 20% of
population (1980-94): $5,800
l Real per capita GDP of richest 20% of
population (1980-94): $51,705
* $14.40 (1985 purchasing power parity) 
a day per person Source:UNDP

FRIENDS IN NEED. Friends of the Children
searches out abused, neglected and
violent youth in Portland, Oregon, and
gives them committed, full-time mentor
“aunts” and “uncles” from their own
community. Each child spends at least
five hours a week with his or her Friend,
going to the park or the mall, getting
help with homework, learning about
personal hygiene. A Friend is a constant
in the child’s life, which otherwise may
be full of upheaval.Above, during
basketball practice,
T.R. hangs on to Friends of the Children
volunteer Zach Harris.

WHEN PARENTS BECOME PUPILS. At Linapuni Elementary School in
Honolulu, Hawaii, parents Taeotafe Melei and Anna Tauala watch
their first-grade children show them how to work on computers
in their school’s computer lab. They are involved in the Parents
and Children Together (PACT) youth centre located at a housing
project that was notorious for gang activity and drugs until PACT
and community residents, with the help of police and the housing
authority, got together to do something about it.They set up a
Parent-Child Center to teach parenting skills, loaned money to
and trained residents to start businesses and set up a
neighbourhood patrol and the youth centre to keep teens and
pre-teens out of trouble.
POP CULTURE. Luz Martinez disciplines his
son, Carlos (left and opposite page).
They have been counselled by Avance, a
parenting programme working in public
housing projects and schools all over
Texas. Avance, which was started in
1970 by teacher Gloria Rodriguez,
encourages parents to use consistent
discipline by communicating with their
children rather than blowing up in
anger and hitting them.

STRONG, SMART, AND BOLD. Girls, Inc. is a national organization dedicated to helping girls
aged 9 to 18 to avoid early sexual activity and pregnancy and become “strong,
smart, and bold”. Its programme teaches assertiveness (how to say “no” and remain
popular) through role playing. Above, in an after-school talk group for middle school
girls in Orange County, California, 13-year-old Kristine receives support from other
girls after revealing some things that are troubling her. This supportive
environment, in a neighbourhood where gang members regularly accost and grope
girls on their way to school, is run by a professionally trained adult. More than half
the girls served through Girls, Inc.’s 750 national affiliates are from single-parent,
low-income families.
A TIMELY HAND. In Brooklyn, New York, the
Bedford Stuyvesant Volunteer
Ambulance Corps has cut response time
to three minutes and trained over 100
people as paramedics. Here, an
ambulanceman helps a man who was hit
on the head with a chair during a street
fight.
