Visiting archaeological sites, monuments and
museums is often an ambivalent kind of tou-
rism.On the one hand,it is seen as having an
i m p o rtant educational and social function,h e l p i n g
tourists to find out more about the culture of the
communities they visit. On the other, it is regarded
as a major ri s k , especially for physically fragile sites
(containing cave paintings, for example) which
attract flocks of touri s t s , and sites where touri s t
facilities are few or inadequate.
So excessive exploitation of sites by tourism has
been criticized on the grounds that it may rob host
communities of their traditional cultural landmarks
and destroy the authenticity and significance of
their heri t a g e . This happens when attempts are
m a d e , through superficial presentations or video
games,to cater for visitors who want to be given a
quick general picture of the site.
This conflict cannot be solved by cultural mea-
sures alone.The growing economic importance of
a r c h a e o l o gical sites, monuments and museums
over the past 15 years as a result of tourist demand
must be taken into account as well.
To cope with the pressure, m a ny countries have
made big efforts to improve and diversify the pre-
sentation of their cultural heritage.Museums have
been refurbished. More than $1.1 billion was spent
on doing up the Louvre in Pa ri s. New sites have
sprung up, including modern art museums in San
F r a n c i s c o, B a r c e l o n a , R o m e , To k yo, Hong Kong
and Bilbao.
Historic city centres have been renovated, and
famous monuments such as the Grassi Palace and
the Ca Rezzonico in Venice have been restored.
There has been a sharp rise in the number of big
exhibitions. More than half a million visitors rou-
tinely visit blockbuster shows (e.g.Vermeer atThe
Hague, Monet in Chicago, and Cézanne and
Georges de la Tour in Paris). The 1999 Monet
exhibition in London broke the record for a tem-
porary exhibition, clocking up more than 8,500
visitors a day.
These efforts to popularize culture have been
widely supported by the media. For most visitors,
h e ritage has become a fa m i l i a r , easily accessible
commodity providing surp ri s e s , r e l a x ation and
e n j oy m e n t . The substantial gr owth in short - s t ay
cultural tourism reflects this. Such packages typically
include a reserved ticket for one or more cultural
e ve n t s , such as an exhibition or an opera, train or air
fare, and board—preferably in a charming hotel.
So tourism has been a driving force over the
past 15 ye a rs in taking cultural heritage into the
economic mainstream. This has brought changes
in the way heritage is preserved and deve l o p e d ,
including the role played by institutions and
i nve s t m e n t .
Pressures to create 
jobs and income
In most countries with big tourist industri e s ,
apart from the United States and Britain, cultural
sites have long been run by public institutions, a n d
the money earned from visitors is largely ploughed
back into the sites.This funding is sometimes top-
ped up by other private and public investment.
In some cases however, the income from these
sites is used for other purposes than their preser-
vation and development, as may be justified by
the economic plight of some of the host countries.
This means there is an incentive to over-exploit
the cultural heritage while cutting back on the
investment needed to preserve and present it pro-
perly.Worse, it can lead to the building of tourist
w Sociologist,administrator 
of the international scientific
committee on cultural tourism of
ICOMOS (the International Council
on Monuments and Sites)



2 S a f e g u a rding heritage
Will m a r ket 
f o rces r u l e ?
w Valéry Pa t i n
Tourism can be a boon for a country’s heritage as long as the law 
of the market is applied in modera t i o n

facilities, especially hotels, whose poor location
and mediocre design seriously harm the quality
and authenticity of cultural landscapes.
Planned management of sites can usually
avoid such mistakes, though sometimes pressure
from economic interests means the plans are not
carried out.This has happened with efforts to res-
tore and preserve the sites at Angkor Wat, in
Cambodia, and Petra, in Jordan (see article page
40).
The growth of tourism, especially the income
it provides, has sometimes induced cultural insti-
tutions to develop and redirect some of their acti-
vities. In France, the National Museums service
(RMN), which runs all state museums, was given
commercial status in 1990, enabling it to collect
entrance fees, publish art books and sell associa-
ted items.The RMN now has an annual turnover
of $125 million and employs about 1,000 people.
In Britain, spinoff income (from heritage-rela-
ted items, mail-order and restaurants) earned by
the National Trust, a private body which manages
more than 500 historic buildings and natural
sites, tops $75 million. New York’s Metropolitan
Museum of Art earns close to $110 million. In
many countries, governments encourage the pri-
vate sector to provide funds to support cultural
heritage or to set up foundations.
Most of the time, cultural institutions and
tourist operators co-operate, via agreements to
share staff training facilities and other forms of
partnership. But clashes occur too. The Tunisian
national tourist office recently claimed the right
to administer directly all the country’s monu-
ments, museums and cultural sites, since most of
the income from admission charges and the sale
of associated items comes from tourists.The mat-
ter was only settled when the president of the
republic stepped in and ruled that this was a job
for the country’s cultural institutions.
Private and public investment to protect cul-
tural heritage (preservation and restoration) is
generally declining while funds to enhance it are
increasing.1 Cultural sites are coming under gro-
wing economic pressure to generate jobs and
income.These days,an economic feasibility study
is often commissioned to back up proposals to
fund the development of a site, monument or
museum.
Furthermore, public funding for preservation
and development now needs simply to be justified
by the presence of a clear “economic”goal, most-
ly based on tourism-related arguments, as in the
case of the European Union’s Leader II, Interreg
and Phare programmes, which received some
$1.9 billion between 1994 and 1999. By compa-
rison, over the same period, the Raphael pro-
gramme—the European Union’s only project
specifically designed to safeguard and preserve
cultural property—drew a mere $38 million.
Heritage supermarkets
Tourism can benefit cultural heritage as long
as there is a cultural rationale independent of eco-
nomic interests, even if it is to some extent adap-
ted to these interests.This means having laws and
r e g u l ations and guaranteed public funding.
Cultural officials must also have a more realistic
view of the obligations and benefits of the econo-
mics of tourism. This implies greater respect for
the private sector’s management skills, insofar as
the private sector can adapt to the specific task of
running monuments, sites and museums which
have become “consumer goods”.
If the law of the market is applied indiscrimi-
nately, it may lead to jazzed-up heritage super-
markets which have been standardized and adap-
ted to meet consumer demand. And where the
authentic heritage would be ill-adapted to this
kind of presentation, there is nothing to rule out
making a copy of it, not to protect the original (as
in the case of prehistoric cave painting sites), but
to increase profits.
This is the idea behind the new seaside resort
at Yasmin Hammamet, in Tu n i s i a , where a
55,000-square-metre artificial medina is being
built. In it, there will be none of the access,traffic
or management problems that exist these days in
real-life medinas. n
A casino-hotel in Las Vegas (United States) recreates an Egyptian setting.
1.This trend is difficult to quantify because financial data
do not make it possible to clearly separate funding
earmarked for preservation from funding for development.
Private and public investment 
to protect cultural heritage
( p reservation and re s t o ration) 
is generally declining 
while funds to enhance it 
a re incre a s i n g
