Around half of all new cases of HIV infection 
in the world involve young people between 
15 and 24. Why?
Because that’s the age when you begin experi-
menting with sex and change partners most
often, which multiplies the risk of infection. Our
studies in Kenya and Zambia show 15, even 23
per cent of girls between 15 and 19 are HIV-posi-
tive, compared with only three to four per cent of
boys. Girls are more vulnerable for both biologi-
cal reasons (the female genitals are more suscep-
tible to infection than those of males and are par-
ticularly vulnerable in the case of girls because
they have not yet developed) as well as socio-cul-
tural ones (whether they are won over by gifts or
are the victims of force, they often have as part-
ners adult men who because of their age are more
likely to be HIV-positive than boys).
The roots of the problem lie mainly in pover-
ty and male chauvinism.Hence the importance of
educating boys, who have to be taught that their
worth doesn’t depend on the number of women
they’ve seduced. We have to change the whole
“sexual culture” as it were. But we have to be
humble: we’re not going to change the world in
the space of a few years.
What’s the impact of preventive education on
young people’s sexual behaviour?
Youth are more receptive to prevention mes-
sages and go on to adopt a more responsible atti-
tude to sexuality than adults. In countries where
there’s been a good response to prevention cam-
paigns, we’ve seen a very marked drop in the rate
of infection among the 15 to 24-year-olds. In the
past eight years, the rate in Ugandan urban areas
has fallen 40 per cent. In Zambia, it has dropped
most markedly among schoolchildren.
All this shows that education has an impor-
tant role to play. Even though it’s true that many
children in developing countries don’t go to
school, the majority nevertheless pass through
school. The opportunity must be seized to give
them an education about Aids adapted to their
age-group, right from the start of primary school.
Some people still fear this will encourage children
to have sexual relationships, but has anyone ever
waited for lessons before starting their sexual life?
It’s been statistically proven that preventive edu-
cation makes people much more sexually respon-
sible, namely by having sexual relationships later
and using protection.
Is Aids education given the attention it deserves in
schools?
Quite honestly, no, and not even in industria-
lized countries. But extraordinary work is being
done in some places. Brazil, for example, has a
very good programme, which begins in primary
schools and is backed by UNESCO. Zimbabwe too,
where UNICEF is helping. Ugandan schools have
introduced a new curriculum subject called
“straight talk” in which pupils comment on daily
newspaper sections written specifically for young
people. The experiment is spreading in Kenya
and a few other countries, but there’s a long way
to go before it becomes general practice.
I myself plan to strengthen my contacts with
education officials, government ministries and
teachers’ unions. Curricula which include the
Aids question have been designed, tested and
then not applied, like many good intentions. It’s
no longer a question of developing teaching mate-
rials, but of making use of them.
The United Nations General Assembly recently
declared its goal to cut the rate of new infection
among young people by a quarter in the countries
hardest hit by the epidemic. Isn’t this overly
ambitious?
Ambitious yes, but not unrealistic. Experience
has shown it can be done if you get all sectors of
society involved, starting with youth. UNAIDS
works a lot with young people. We design aware-
ness campaigns not just with young staff mem-
bers in their early 20s but also after consulting
teenagers whose ideas are always, I must say,
quite refreshing.
Since 1997, we’ve had an annual World Aids
Campaign which targets young people.This year,
the young Brazilian footballer Ronaldo has
agreed to be involved. His words carry much
more weight than mine among the youth of poor
communities like those where he grew up. The
popular Ugandan singer Philly Lutaaya also wor-
ked with us before he died of Aids. If all the
famous people who are HIV-positive admitted the



Seizing every o p p o r t u n i t y
Fighting Aids involves no less than changing our whole sexual culture. Peter Piot, E x e c u t i v e
D i rector of UN A I D S, s t resses the impact of preventive education on young people’s behaviour
Has anyone ever waited for
lessons before starting their
sexual life? It’s been statistically
p roven that preventive education
m a kes people much more
sexually re s p o n s i b l e, namely by
having sexual relationships later
and using pro t e c t i o n

Getting youth through the Aids crisis
fact, as Lutaaya did,it would have a great impact.
But they often keep quiet and I understand their
fear of being rejected if they admit it. Aids is
Janus-faced, and each side is just as terrifying as
the other—one is the virus that kills and the other
is the society, which also kills.
How can the stigma be fought?
That’s my latest priority, in fact. To be prag-
matic, we send volunteers who are open about
having HIV to work in schools, hospitals, govern-
ment ministries and other key places. T h i s
“public” approach to Aids has a much greater
effect than any speech about respecting the indi-
vidual. These volunteers are already working in
Malawi, Zambia, Thailand, South Africa and
Burundi and soon in Burkina Faso. I’d like to
spread this strategy all over the world, but we
don’t have the resources and it’s very hard to find
people willing to take on such a mission.
Why do you think Aids is still largely cloaked in
silence 20 years after it appeared?
The taboo surrounding Aids is a universal
phenomenon. In most societies, talking about
sexuality isn’t easy, even between two partners.
Also, the impact of Aids on societies wasn’t felt as
strongly 15 years ago as today. People also go into
denial, which is an instinctive reaction to danger.
Read The Plague by Albert Camus again.Another
natural reaction is to say that it’s only something
that happens to others. So for 20 years,we’ve pre-
ferred to keep our eyes shut. Uganda, Senegal
and Thailand are among the very few countries
whose political leaders have reacted in a timely
manner. It isn’t just a matter of poor countries
either: U.S. President Ronald Reagan never pro-
nounced the word “Aids” in public.
But this year,the dialogue has started going in
the other direction. Until now, I had to convince
political leaders that the situation was serious in
their countries. Now it’s they who are taking the
initiative.That’s a big step forward.
How do you explain this turn-around?
First,the impact of Aids on societies has beco-
me so great it can’t be ignored any longer, despi-
te the tremendous human capacity for denial.
Then, without boasting, I have to say that the
concerted action of the United Nations has hel-
ped a lot. We’re seizing every opportunity to
spread the message about Aids by going all out to
increase the number of sectors we work with—
groups like boy scouts,women’s movements,pea-
sants and others. I myself meet heads of state,
mayors of big cities, ministers of finance, business
leaders, army generals, musicians, footballers,
bishops and imams—anyone who can influence
members of a society. Religious leaders can be a
big obstacle to a prevention campaign but I most-
ly consider them to be allies.
Are they really allies?
I’ve noticed that those religious leaders in
close contact with the population—the parish
priest, the village imam—are the most receptive
to prevention campaigns, including encouraging
the use of condoms, which is the most delicate
aspect.The further you go up the hierarchy, the
harder dialogue becomes. Nevertheless, a Vatican
envoy attended our March 1999 conference in
Buenos Aires about involving priests in the fight
against Aids. The message of the conference was
clear: sex education at school is vital. Only a few
years ago, this was inconceivable. n
Interview by Jasmina Sopova,
