Once their work was done, t h e
Aborigines say, these supernatural crea-
tures—which still have influence over the
inhabitants and the fertility of the land—
spread out over the countryside, pausing
to fight or to rest, and established a num-
ber of sacred places: the so-called places
and trails of “Dreamtime”.
But the dream stops right there.
Today, the Kakadu region is seen as the
site of one of the world’s richest deposits
of uranium. The park, the biggest in
Australia and the size of Belgi u m ,
contains an explosive mix—the familiar
t u g - o f - war between conservation and
economic development, the tricky pro-
blem of radioactive waste and the asser-
tion of indigenous peoples’ rights.
Three mining enclaves (Ranger,
Jabiluka and Koongarra) were mapped
out in the early 1970s, before the park
was created in 1979, Australian officials
point out.The Ranger mine has been ope-
rating since 1981. The Northern Land
Council (NLC), which officially repre-
sents the 16 local Aborigine tribes in the
running of the park, gave the go-ahead in
1982 for the Jabiluka mine.
A year later, things changed. A new
government was elected which curbed
uranium production and put the Jabiluka
project on hold. But “with the agreement
of the NLC and consent of the Aboriginal
traditional owners,” according to an April
1999 Australian government report, the
Jabiluka lease was transferred in August
1991 to the firm Energy Resources of
10 The UNESCO Courier - October 1999
P L A N E T



T HE KA KA DU A FFA IR SH A K ES
T HE HERI TAGE WORLD 
w Sophie Boukhari
The opening of a mine in Australia’s Kakadu Park has revived international debate about the
protection of the world heritage
w UNESCO Courier journalist
‘ We are telling the truth. 
Non-Aborigine people often
doubt the sincerity 
of our cultures. But this sacred
site belongs to the Mirra r s . ’
n
How far should world heritage be
protected and who should judge?
Nearly 30 years after UNESCO adop-
ted its 1972 Convention on protecting
natural and cultural heritage sites “of
outstanding universal value”, the ques-
tion is still stirring passions. The much-
publicized row over Kakadu, which was
put on the World Heritage List in 1981, is
the most recent example.
Supporters and opponents of extrac-
ting uranium from the Jabiluka mine,
which is an enclave in the park but not
officially part of it, have been fighting it
out for the past few years. Battles between
experts, flights of rhetoric, clashes bet-
ween police and militants, press campai-
gns, special meetings of UNESCO units
and diplomatic horse-trading have all
been part of this stormy episode of world
heritage.
Kakadu is in A u s t r a l i a ’s Nort h e rn
Territory and includes a wide range of
wetland and woodland ecosystems. The
area contains many rare species and
numerous places where ancient rock dra-
wings can be seen. Cultural traditions
there go back more than 50,000 years,
making it the continent’s oldest known
human settlement. This long history
makes its “cultural landscape” a unique
s h owcase of the relationship betwe e n
humans and their environment.
Dreamtime
The scenery, plants and animals of the
region feature strongly in the religion and
traditions of the 550 or so Aborigines who
live in Kakadu.They keep a close spiritual
link to their lands, of which they are “tra-
ditional owners” under Australian law.
They believe they were put there by “spi-
rit beings” such as the rainbow serpent,
which they say appeared at the time of the
world’s creation to give the planet its
shape and existence.
Australia (ERA), although the deposit
was still not being mined.
There was another U-turn in March
1996, when the Liberal Party won natio-
nal elections and said it favoured opening
new uranium mines, including the one at
Jabiluka.After environmental surveys, the
government gave a green light to ERA,
which started digging in early 1998. It
reckons the project, which will create
jobs, could earn up to $2.5 billion in
export earnings and produce $140 mil-
lion in royalties for the Aborigines. But
the 27 members of the Mirrar tribe are
dead against the project.
A “dangerous” site
The Mirr a rs are the traditional
owners of the Jabiluka enclave.They say
the mine is dangerous for them and they
no longer feel bound by the agreement
the NLC signed in 1982.Their new lea-
der,Yvonne Margarula, has proved very
tough. They say the Aborigine leaders,
including her late father, were pushed
into the agreement by the mining compa-
nies at a time when Aborigine rights were
still little enforced and their leaders unu-
sed to “modern” negotiations.
The Mirrars also consider the expe-
rience of the Ranger mine inconclusive.
Although the Aborigines have received
r oya l t i e s , “the social situation in the
region has not improved since the 1980s,”
according to a 1997 survey commissioned
by several of the parties involved in run-
ning Kakadu, including ERA. U n l i k e
other Aborigine tribes who favour the
mining, the Mirrars say it will turn their
lives upside down and threaten their tra-
ditional subsistence economy based on
hunting and gathering. They also stress
that the site of the mine is a very sacred
spot, one of the “Dreaming” places that
are “dangerous” because disturbing them
will have terrible consequences. “We are
telling the truth,” says Margarula. “Non-
Aborigine people often doubt the sinceri-

It was also concerned about the mine’s
“visual impact” on the site and the dama-
ge it might cause to the daily culture and
religion of the Mirrars.
The Intern ational Council of
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and
the International Centre for the Study of
the Preservation and Restoration of
Cultural Property (ICCRO M ) — t wo
advisory bodies of the World Heritage
Committee—emphasized the fragility of
the intangible heritage of the Aborigines.
“We respect Mecca and Jerusalem, so we
October 1999 - The UNESCO Courier 11
P L A N E T
Taken in October 1998, this aerial shot clearly shows the advanced state of construction of the Jabiluka mine by the company Energy Resources of Australia. 
The Mirrars, an Aboriginal group, maintain that the mine would seriously harm their most sacred sites.
‘ We respect Mecca 
and Jerusalem, so we should
respect these holy places too.
The problem is that nobody
has ever defined their exact
area. That’s just known to 
a few sages. They’re supposed
to keep this secret but now
they’re ready to reveal it 
to defend themselves.’
ty of our cultures. But this sacred site
belongs to the Mirrars.”
The tribe teamed up with ecology
activists to form the Jabiluka Blockade in
1996 to halt the project, and militants
have clashed with police at the site several
times. Almost two-thirds of Australians
say they are against opening the mine. An
a g gr e s s i ve intern ational campaign has
been launched and has spread around the
world.
The dispute soon landed on the desk
of UNESCO’s World Heritage Committee,
on which sit representatives of 21 coun-
tries each elected for six years. They have
been inundated by hundreds of letters
denouncing the mine’s threat to the envi-
ronment and the cultural rights of the
Mirrars. The World Conservation Union,
one of the Committee’s three advisory
bodies, confirms that the danger is real.
The Committee decided to send
experts to Kakadu in June 1998.The mis-
sion reported that there were “ s e ve r e
ascertained and potential dangers to the
cultural and natural values”of the park.It
noted the scientific uncertainty about the
impact of the mining on water supplies
and aquatic wildlife and about the long-
term effect of stored radioactive tailings.
should respect these holy places too,” says
Henry Cleere of ICOMOS. “The pro-
blem is that nobody has ever defined their
exact area. That’s just known to a few
s a g e s. T h e y ’re supposed to keep this
secret but now they’re ready to reveal it to
defend themselves.”
C l e e r e , along with the Mirr a rs and
m a ny expert s , s ays the Jabiluka enclave
cannot be dissociated from the park’s huge
n e t work of “ D r e a m i n g ” trails and places
e ven if legally it is not part of the heri t a g e
s i t e .To disturb the enclave , they say, wo u l d
t h r e aten the whole sacred netwo r k .
Cultural rights
The mission criticized the fact that the
building of the mine was presented to the
World Heritage Committee as a “fait
accompli” when the Committee should
h ave been told about it before wo r k
began, according to the terms of the 1972
Convention. It called on the Australian
government to revise the 1982 and 1991
agreements so as to protect the Mirrars’
cultural rights.
In December 1998, the Committee,
meeting in Kyoto (Ja p a n ) , urged the
Australian government to stop building
the mine and scheduled a special session

for July 1999 to decide whether to classi-
fy Kakadu as an endangered heritage site.
The NGOs were very pleased and the
Australian government launched a coun-
ter-attack.
The Kakadu dispute has many
domestic political implications and has
set off fierce arguments with the opposi-
tion Labor Party and the Greens, who
challenge the government’s environmen-
tal policies and accuse it of jeopardizing
the process of reconciliation with the
Aborigines, which was stepped up in the
early 1990s.
The environment minister, S e n .
Robert Hill, led a strong delegation to
Paris to stress several points. First, that
Australia had no lessons to learn from
anyone.It had been among the first coun-
tries to sign the Convention in 1974 and
had changed its laws accordingly. The
mission said Australia had the biggest
expanse of world heritage sites of all the
signatory countries and that it spent $30
million a year on maintaining them.
Alcohol and Western food
Hill emphasized that the mining
enclaves were already there when the site
was put on the World Heritage List and
that Australia had said at the time it reser-
ved the right to start operations at
Jabiluka. The Ranger mine had not cau-
sed any environmental damage, t h e
Australian delegates said, pointing to
their country’s long experience in mining
and very strict regulation of it on ecologi-
cal and health grounds. Citing a number
of experts, they said environmental risk
was small and the way the radioactive tai-
lings were stored was very safe.The mine
was also hidden by hills and hardly visible
from the park. It could only really be seen
from the air and only 10 per cent of visi-
tors to Kakadu flew over the park.
Recalling that the Aborigines had ini-
tially agreed to mining at Jabiluka, the
officials said the mine did not directly
threaten the sacred sites, which were pro-
tected under Australian law.They in effect
accused the Mirrars of using their religion
as an argument to derail the project.The
April 1999 government report said it was
not until 1997 that there was a call to
extend Boyweg, one of the sacred sites,
possibly to cover the whole mining valley.
“These revisions upgraded the site from
‘sacred’ to ‘sacred and dangerous’,” it
said, adding that the new call was “not
consistent with anthropological records
or previous statements.”
The delegation also said the govern-
ment was not responsible for the slow
social and economic development of the
Aborigines and the breaking down of
their culture. “We can’t stop them using
r oyalties to buy alcohol and We s t e rn
food,” one delegation member told the
C o m m i t t e e . The Australians promised
however to revise ERA’s mining plans and
resume talks with the Mirrars to establish
their cultural rights more clearly.
Then, on July 12, 1999, Hill sprung a
surprise: the Jabiluka mine would start
operations in 2001 but just slowly, only
reaching full capacity when the Ranger
mine had virtually closed in about 10
years’ time. The government would ear-
mark $1.8 million to beef up the park’s
infrastructure and would step up efforts
to improve housing, water supply, educa-
tion, health and the job situation for the
Aborigines.
“There will be an enquiry in coming
months to assess the danger to the cultu-
ral property of the Aborigines,” he said.
“We intend to appoint a mediator bet-
ween the traditional owners and ERA.
We’re going to take a break. We recognize
the problems of mining in this environ-
ment, even if the mine is not strictly part
of the park.”
The World Heritage Committee deci-
ded not to classify Kakadu as an endan-
gered heritage site. But the Committee
said it was still “gravely concerned”by the
mine’s impact on the living cultures of
Kakadu and by the lack of dialogue and
progress in jointly managing the Mirrar
people’s cultural heritage. It said it had
s i g n i ficant reservations concerning the
“scientific uncertainties” relating to the
project and asked the Australian govern-
ment to present new reports before April
15, 2000.
The many NGO representatives who
came to UNESCO headquarters at the
same time as the delegation strongly pro-
tested.The Wilderness Society called the
Committee’s decision “a dramatic capitu-
l ation to intense pressure from the
Australian gove rn m e n t .” It and other
NGOs said the decision damaged the
The Jabiluka, Ranger and Koongarra enclaves are
not themselves classified as “world heritage” though
they are within the Kakadu park (20,000 km2).
Jabiluka
Ranger
Koongarra
0                          50 km
Kakadu park has many prehistoric rock art sites portraying mythological heroes, animals 
and objects familiar to the Aborigines.
Northern
Territory
A U S T R A L I A
Kakadu 
National 
Park

1972 Convention’s credibility and was the
outcome of a “dirty tricks campaign” by
Australia to win over the countries repre-
sented on the Committee.
The government had announced in
early 1999 a $600,000 lobbying campaign
to prevent Kakadu being classified as an
endangered site. It also said in June 1999
it would back the candidacy of Australia’s
former foreign minister Gareth Evans to
succeed Fe d e rico Mayor as Director-
General of UN E S C O. The W i l d e rn e s s
Society said it hoped such backing was
not simply “a way of pressuring” the cur-
rent chair of the World Heri t a g e
Committee, Japan’s Koichiro Matsuura,
who is also a candidate to replace Mayor.
A p a rt from its many political dimen-
s i o n s , the Kakadu affair has shown how
vulnerable world heritage is. H ow far must
p r e s e rvation go, when exceptional land-
scapes and monuments are increasingly
under threat , as evidenced by the lengthe-
ning list of endangered sites, which now
total 23? Can mining or other economic
projects be blocked when they endanger
sites but when the need for jobs and deve-
lopment is more and more urgent? A n d
who should decide the importance of a site
and how it should be preserve d ?
“In the begi n n i n g, world heritage wa s
d e fined in the light of We s t e rn artistic cul-
tural traditions,” s ays Cleere. “But that ’s
c h a n g e d . N ow we recognize cultures
which aren’t monuments but where the
landscape has a ve ry gr e at cultural va l u e ,
especially in A f rica and Oceania. T h e y
h ave to be protected in the name of huma-
n i t y.”
But what should be done when their
importance is not fully appreciated, inclu-
ding in their own country? How far can
the international community go to pro-
tect them? The jury is still out. Under the
1972 Convention,countries which ask for
sites to be put on the World Heritage List
must recognize them as “a world heritage
for whose protection it is the duty of the
international community to co-operate”.
But they can also interpret it as meaning
October 1999 - The UNESCO Courier 13
P L A N E T
‘Now we recognize cultures
which aren’t monuments 
but where the landscape 
has a very great cultural value,
especially in Africa 
and Oceania. They have 
to be protected in the name 
of humanity. ’
their sovereignty will be “totally respec-
ted”.
With Kakadu, the Australian govern-
ment has stuck to a very narrow interpre-
tation of the Convention regarding inter-
national co-operation,as embodied by the
Committee. It has refused to recognize
the Committee’s right to list the site as
endangered without its prior agreement.
Sen. Hill has also challenged the way the
Committee works by questioning the legi-
timacy of its advisory bodies, saying “the
role of so-called independent experts and
advisers is up for scrutiny in the future.”
Eco-imperialism
He has thereby given comfort to those
who oppose joint management of world
h e ri t a g e . Fo rty members of the U. S .
C o n gress have backed Australia ove r
Kakadu, denouncing UNESCO’s supposed
“eco-imperialism”.
In a petition to President Bill Clinton
on July 1, 1 9 9 9 , they said any dispute ove r
an Australian mine should be settled by
Australians “ working with their elected
l e a d e rs , not at some obscure Wo r l d
H e ritage Committee.”They urged Clinton
to ensure that the Committee did not
“ m e d d l e ” in the Jabiluka issue. The pres-
sure group also wants world heritage sites
in the United States to be controlled by the
U. S . C o n gr e s s. It said this demand was “ a
response to the Committee’s meddling in a
dispute regarding a proposed gold mine
l o c ated on pri vate property outside the
b o u n d a ry of Ye l l owstone National Pa r k ” .
The U. S . g ove rnment forced the abandon-
ment of the mining project there in 1996,
after Ye l l owstone was declared an endange-
red world heritage site.
These and many other examples show
that joint management of world heritage
is neve rtheless gaining gr o u n d . T h e
Jabiluka affair was not part of this trend,
but it has illustrated the astonishing orga-
nizational power of supporters of world
g ove rn a n c e . N G O s , politicians (the
European Parliament voted against the
mine in January 1999) and ordinary citi-
zens all over the world were inspired to
campaign to “save Kakadu”.
“We’ve never seen anything like this,”
says Sarah Titchen, who is in charge of
the case at UN E S C O’s World Heri t a g e
Centre.“Now everyone around the world
involved in world heritage knows about
Kakadu.”
Meanwhile the saga continues. T h e
M i rr a rs are now opposing, quite legally,
the building of a 15-km road through their
t e rri t o ry. The road would allow ERA to
take uranium mined at Jabiluka to be trea-
ted at the Ranger mining complex, w h i c h
would be less environmentally harmful bu t
most of all, much cheaper. ERA has eve n
hinted it will leave the Kakadu region by
2006 if the Mirr a rs do not gi ve way. I t
s h o u l d n ’t count on the rainbow serpent to
advise them to do so. n
At the White House in April 1999, Hillary Clinton welcomes Yvonne Margarula, one of the 27 Mirrar
“traditional owners” of the Jabiluka enclave who had recently received the Goldman Environmental Prize
along with Jacqui Katona, (in background) for the campaign against the uranium mine.
