A corpse lies among rotting vegetables in the
street of Ikosi, the largest fruit and ve g e t a b l e
market in Lagos.The killing took place the
day before,on April 15,when bulldozers were sent
in by the local gove rnment to level the market.
Barefoot, wearing shorts and a T-shirt emblazoned
with the name of A m e rican basketball playe r
Michael Jo r d a n , the dead man remains anony m o u s ,
probably just another migrant worker at the market
where 12,000 people scratched a living. Black cloth
c ove rs his face—the sole act of kindness his co-wo r-
k e rs can bestow. Only the local gove rnment can
r e m ove a cadaver but officials don’t dare enter Ikosi.
Normally, the market would buzz with lorries
dropping pineapples, plantain and yams beside
the labyrinth of ramshackle shops, stalls and
tables. Now a putrid mix of rotting fruit, tear gas
and tension hangs in the air a day after the local
government chairman, Mrs. Thorpe, ordered a
private contractor to demolish Ikosi, which she



An attempt to destroy a fruit market highlights 
the mutual suspicion between government and
people who have no choice but to take matters 
into their own hands
Fear and loathing in I ko s i
considered a fire-trap and a magnet for crime.
She maintains that she had the full support of
Ikosi’s trade union representatives.
Sevi Taiwo is one of those leaders. “We built
this place by ourselves,” says Mrs Taiwo, who has
worked at Ikosi for 30 years. Mrs. Taiwo claims
that she met with the local government several
times to discuss ways of improving the market’s
sanitary conditions. She feared that plans to raze
and rebuild Ikosi would result in rental fees
beyond the reach of the current occupants. Her
voice went unheard.
On the morning of April 15, police ordered
people to leave as the bulldozer headed for the
first shop. The owner pleaded with them to stop
but the police kicked and shot his 24-year-old
assistant,Bob. As the bulldozer moved on,crowds
threw stones and police fired tear gas and bullets.
But the marketers kept coming and the police
fled. Emboldened by the retreat, the crowd set
fire to the bulldozer.
Within an hour,the police returned with rein-
forcements. “People weren’t even fighting, just
running as the police fired at them,” says Mutia
Akintae, a student passing by. “As I ran, I felt my
clothes burning.” Acid had been thrown on his
chest and face, giving rise to speculation that

The South’s urban re v o l u t i o n
“area boys”, bands of unemployed men, had been
brought in to intensify the havoc.
In the immediate afterm at h , the marketers estimat e
t h at up to several dozens of people were killed and a quart e r
of the shops destroye d .The trade union officials are in
h i d i n g, widely suspected of colluding with the gove rn m e n t .
Women clear the debri s , while men patrol for looters.
M e a n w h i l e , the elders seek the support of the o b a , t h e
a r e a ’s traditional king.
The 97-year-old oba is indisposed. Besides,says his
secretary, Prince Jede Rokosu, the king’s authority
extends only over spiritual matters. “I have heard
of people being killed at Ikosi,” says Rokosu,“but
I have not seen anything.”Would the prince or the
king come to see Ikosi and to consult the elders?
“That would not be appropriate.” If the people
came to the king, could he present their concerns
to the government? “Events have overtaken that
possibility,” says the prince.
Two mornings after the confrontat i o n , a
human rights activist is brought to Ikosi for
consultation. Under an overhang, women sweep
the ground and arrange benches as a crowd
gathers. A prayer for peace is offered by Chief
Bamiro, an unofficial leader, before discussions
turn to Nwaogbe’s offer to file a court injunction.
Gradually, a new dynamic takes hold in Ikosi.
When the bulldozers first arrived, the marketers
were prepared to die rather than see their liveli-
hoods destroyed. But in the aftermath, there is a
clear consensus that bravery alone won’t prevent
another attack.The next step in survival requires
organization. So after consulting their people, the
elders decide to propose to the government that if
the authorities provide specific guidelines for a
new Ikosi, the people will build it on their own.
Despite the new resolve, tension is still high
with fears of another police attack.Tires smoulder
at the front of the market but deeper inside
bunches of plantain and bags of millet are on dis-
play as children hawk water and music blares
from a barber shop. The dead man still lies in the
street but Ikosi takes a deep breath. A. O. n
The Ikosi market,still bustling with life several days after the bulldozers went in.
