“You could see the bones sticking out under
my skin and I was almost blind,” s ay s
Amadou Sow. “I’d had Aids for 12 years
when I decided to see the m a l a n go h e a l e rs. M a l a n go
means ‘ w h at is needed and is suitable.’ I came back
feeling better. Since then, I have recovered my sight
and gained we i g h t .”While Sow is a “ m i r a c u l o u s ”5 0
years or so old,he knows that he is not completely
cured of Aids.
In Senegal’s Fatick region, 150 kilometres
from the capital,Dakar,the Malango Association,
founded in 1983, has 450 members who are tra-
ditional healers (a fifth of them women) and work
in 264 villages. Starting from the belief that natu-
re has a cure for every ailment, they use mainly
powders, potions and plant extracts. But invoking
the spirits is also part of traditional therapy. In the
animist view of the world,humans are considered
a link in the cosmic chain who summon the lower
orders (minerals, plants and animals) to join the
higher ones (spirits, ancestors and gods). All of
them must be called on in the hope of finding
cures.
Unlike many of their counterp a rts in other
countries, the association’s healers don’t promise
their patients they will be cured of Aids.They suc-
cessfully treat some of the symptoms (diarr h o e a ,
vomiting and leukaemia) and ease sufferi n g .W h e n
the treatment is ineffective , they steer their pat i e n t s
towards health practitioners who work with them.
So far they have treated more than 10,000 people
from A f rica (including Senegal), Europe and the
United States.
The first stop
on the road
Three quarters of all Senegalese go to traditio-
nal healers. “In some areas, there’s one doctor for
e ve ry 100,000 people and one traditional healer
for eve ry 1,000,” s ays Dr. E rick Gbodoussou, h e a d
of the Malango Association’s experimental centre.
Gbodoussou trained in We s t e rn medical schools
but is convinced traditional healers can not only
effectively fight some diseases, but can also play a
useful role in prevention.“When I treat someone
with Aids,I discourage them from having sex with
their part n e rs ,” s ays one of the associat i o n ’s healers ,
a man in his 70s. “I tell them they can infect their
partners if they don’t do what I say.”
w Journalist with Sud
Quotidien,Dakar (Senegal)
In Dakar’s Tilène market, traditional healers
have been interested in helping to raise awareness
about the disease.“Aids exists and we have to dis-
cuss it with young people who are sexually acti-
ve,” says Ibra Niokhobaye Diouf. Do the ill
people dare talk about their sex lives? “Ten out of
the average 15 patients I see each day raise the
subject openly,” he says. “I use each occasion to
make them understand they have to protect
themselves from this disease that everyone talks
about so much.” With more healers like Diouf,
the message about Aids reaches the whole popu-
lation by word of mouth.
In the village of Sambé, in the Diourbel
region,healers attended seminars on Aids in 1998
organized by the NGOs Enda Tiers-Monde and
Ndef Leng (“act together”).The seminars featu-
red information workshops, debates and docu-
mentary films which convinced them of the pre-
vention campaign’s worth. Unfortunately, there
were only 35 healers present.“Healers aren’t very
e f ficiently used in awareness campaigns, ye t
they’re our first stop on the road,” says Dr.
Moustapha Guèye, of Enda Tiers-Monde. In our
talks, African traditional structures always have
pride of place. It’s time to make use of them.”
The intern ational conference on traditional
medicine and HIV/Aids, held in Dakar in March
1 9 9 9 , c o n firmed the key role of the healers. T h e
c o n f e r e n c e , organized by Prometra (a Senegalese
NGO which promotes traditional medicine) and
sponsored by a dozen intern ational organizat i o n s ,
attracted about 200 healers and 250 doctors and
s c i e n t i s t s , as well as political decision-makers ,j o u r-
nalists and people living with HIV and Aids from
about 30 countries around the globe. At the end of
the discussions, the traditional healers were inv i t e d
to take part in UNAIDS programmes and at t e n d
the next world conference on A i d s , in Durban
(South A f rica) in July 2000. n



H e a l e rs
to the re s c u e
w Alassane Cissé
Vastly outnumbering standard doctors, t raditional healers are destined to play a key role 
in the fight against Aids in A f r i c a . Senegal shows the way forward
HIV/Aids 
in Senegal
Out of a population of
8.7 million,75,000
live with HIV/Aids. Among
adults in the 15-to-49 age
group, 1.77% are HIV-
infected,along with 3,800
children under the age of
15. The number who have
died of Aids since the
epidemic began is not
known.
Source: UNAIDS, 1998.
‘In some are a s,
t h e re ’s one doctor 
for every 100,000 people 
and one traditional healer 
for every 1,000’
