A world 
in t ra n s i t i o n
w Yash Ghai and John Ko h u t
In a number of countries emerging from authoritarian rule, a new quest for the rule of law is
being encouraged by popular pre s s u re and globalization
w Respectively Professor of
Law at Hong Kong University, and
Editor-in-chief of the UNESCO
Courier
On the steppes of Central Asia in countries
not so long ago under Stalinist rule, youths
are being taught something unimaginable a
decade ago: to defend their legal rights in the
event of being stopped by police.After 17 years of
dictatorship, Benin has a new constitutional court
to which even the humblest citizen can appeal.
Almost one third of its decisions so far have
concerned human rights violations.
The passion for the principle,if not always the
practice, of the rule of law is not coincidental.
Much of the world has changed radically in
recent years, moving from one-party authorita-
rian rule and command economics to multi-party
politics or to free markets,and often both.Rule of
law—a system in which,in theory and in practice,
the law is binding on all persons as well as the
government, a system which treats all equally—is
seen as instrumental to the success of such trans-
formation.
The present wave of transition started 20
years ago in Latin America with the dismantling
of military rule and the establishment of demo-
cracy. This was followed by the collapse of com-
munist regimes in the Soviet bloc, and the shift
towards  more democratic political systems and
free market-oriented reform. Meanwhile, a num-
ber of states and territories in Africa and Asia, as
a result of mass movements (Benin,Indonesia) or
political evolution (Taiwan), are changing autho-
ritarian or dictatorial regimes to more participa-
tory and accountable systems.
Momentum for legal reform has come from
growing popular pressure at national level, as well
as from globalization,the catch-word not only for
increasing trade and economic integration, but
also for standards of civil conduct affecting ordi-
nary people’s basic rights. Membership in econo-
mic and political groupings and federations often
brings international pressure for countries to pro-
tect basic rights through a rule of law.
While a set of laws in itself doesn’t guarantee
individuals rights—Nazi Germany and Stalinist
Soviet Union had legal codes—a legal system
equitably and tenaciously implemented is a cor-
n e rstone of democracy. “I can’t conceive of
democracy without a rule of law,” says Meir
Leker, Secretary General of the International
Association of Legal Science.
The force of tradition
If there is consensus on the need for a rule of
law, the dynamics involved in success or failure in
getting to such a goal are varied. First of all there
is tradition. For instance, one legal scholar traces
the absence of the rule of law in Russia back to
the influence of Russian Orthodoxy on the legal
consciousness and a tradition of absolutism unin-
terrupted for nearly half a millennium. On the
other hand, a strong traditional sense of freedom
can give impetus to the establishment of the rule
of law after a period of dictatorship. Secondly,
socio-economic factors play a part: in free mar-
kets, workers, business owners and investors all
demand protection. Then there is the Weberian
analysis that as political leaderships move away
from chari s m atic legi t i m a cy based on gr e at
deeds—such as leading a revolution—they seek
l e gi t i m a cy elsewhere, including in effective
government through the law.
In the 1960s and 1970s, USAID (the U. S .
A g e n cy for Intern ational Development) and the
Ford Fo u n d ation sponsored law reform pro-
grammes in the South directed more at economic
and social development than political deve l o p m e n t .
By and large they fa i l e d . G ove rnments which pas-
sed the laws had little commitment to them.
S u f ficient resources were seldom provided for the
i m p l e m e n t ation of the law s. Most projects ove r e s t i-
m ated the capacity of states to absorb new policies
and institutions; for example there were not
e n o u g h , or not enough well trained, l aw ye rs ,j u d g e s ,
a d m i n i s t r at o rs , who understood or were able to
o p e r ate the new law s. Most projects underestimat e d
the persistence of custom and customary practices.
Many similar issues arise in current efforts to
build a rule of law. Here we assess the dynamics
at play in those attempts. n
If there is consensus 
on the need for a rule of law,
the dynamics involved 
in success or failure in getting 
to such a goal are varied
