TOYOTA MAKES TREES
◗ Yoshinori Takahashi

Industrialists can no longer ignore the effects of
their activity on the environment. In a world
which is more and more polluted and threate-
ned by global warming, their reputation and
future depend on doing something about it.
The Japanese vehicle-maker Toyota has
understood this since the end of the 1980s. It
launched its “Toyota Forest” programme in
1992, the year of the Rio Earth Summit, with the
goal of using biotechnology to turn trees into
anti-pollution agents.
Today Toyota is proud of its experimental
forests, including Foresta Hills, half an hour by
car from the company’s headquarters. The fir m
is trying to revive s a t oy a m a, which are ancient
protected hills on the edge of populated areas.
They are a source of wood and prized items like
m a t s u t a ke mushrooms and u r u s h i, Japanese
l a c q u e r.
“In this forest, we’re developing the same
activities our ancestors did in the 19th century , ”
says Yasuhiko Komatsu, the project’s chief. “We
want to create s a t oy a m a for the 21st century. ”
The giant company’s engineers say they are
t rying to reduce vehicle emissions but cannot get
rid of them completely. So other solutions have
to be found—by using trees.
At Foresta Hills, the effect of different kinds of
trees on the level of carbon dioxide in the air ca n
be measured. In some places it is 10 to 20 times
l ower than in others. The most “effective” trees
are those which grow quickly, stand up to diffi-
cult surroundings and resist diseases and
insects, so these are the ones biologists want to
learn how to cultivate. Increasing the number of
chromosomes of some trees has boosted their
a b i l i ty to absorb toxic gases by a third.
Toyota is also researching into how to speed
up the growth of trees in very acidic soil with a
v i ew to the reforestation of southeast As i a ,
which has been devastated by deforestation.
Recently, the company began organizing refo-
restation activities outside Japan, and in August
1998 joined with paper manufacturers to set up
the firm of Australian Afforestation Pty. Over the
next decade, 5,000 fast-growing, drought-resis-
tant eucalyptus trees will be planted in Austra l i a ,
later to be chopped down and made into paper.
Toyota’s work has drawn criticism how e v e r.
Environmentalists are worried about the effects
on the environment of genetica l l y - m o d i fied spe-
cies. Others argue that the main priority in fig h-
ting the greenhouse effect is to reduce emissions
of pollutants and cut back on motor tra f fic .
“The car-makers are planting trees to give
themselves a nice green image while hoping
their vehicle sales don’t drop,” says Michel
Raquet of Greenpeace Europe. “What will they
get in return? Carbon credits, even though there
is no scientific guarantee that their forestry pro-
jects will have any effect on the atmosphere.”
“One of these days,” says Ashley Mattoon of
Worldwatch Institute, “we will have to ask our-
selves how much more time, energy and money
should be spent on tinkering with nature and
s a t i s fying our dependence on fossil fuels.” ■
◗ Tokyo-based journalist
Right,  a tree seedling whose chromosomes have been doubled. It will grow into a tree with greater
efficiency at absorbing toxic gases than the ordinary specimen, left, of the same species.
