S h a n g h a i
r e b o r n
Thronged with pedestrians and traffic,
Nanjing Road is one of booming 
Shanghai’s main thoroughfares.
Shanghai today is an immense building site
bristling with cranes and scaffolding.
Photos by
Georgi Pinkhasov

A night out in a disco.
Shanghai girls prepare for a white wedding.
Night-time on the Bund,
the famous waterfront promenade built 
by the colonial powers a century ago.

Shanghai was once a colonial gateway into China,
then went into eclipse. Today it is a vast building
site bidding to rise as high as New York
Chen Danyan*
■
In the nineties, Shanghai has exploded like a Chinese firecracker.Yet this is not
its first explosive boom.That occurred some 80 years ago. Shanghai used to be
a small fishing port carved into British, French,American and Japanese
spheres of influence.While it was carved up, Shanghai grew into the largest
metropolis in Asia. In the seventies, Shanghai lost its lustre.When night fell, the city
was dark as the corridors and toilets in many homes which were dimly lit by the
30-watt energy-saving bulbs then popular across the city. The river banks were
dotted with courting couples who had no rooms of their own and no cafés or parks
to go to.The riverside became the only place where they could meet.
Today Shanghai, like a “prodigal son”, is working frantically to make up for
whatever time it has wasted, harbouring an ambition to overtake Hong Kong in its
development and to emulate New York or other big cities of the world.
In the old parts of the city, houses can be seen on all sides with the same big
s i g n : “ To be demolished”. Whole neighbourhoods have been pulled dow n , a n d
where a wall still remains one can tell by the blotches and stains on it that here
stood a dining table and there a low bed in which someone must have sat reading
Shopping fever takes hold of the city.
* Shanghai-based Chinese writer.

with his greasy head against the wa l l . Old buildings of the colonial period are
being levelled one after another at night by blasting, to be replaced by skyscrapers
with glass outer wa l l s. In the dow n t own area, an overhead highway and a subway
are being built simultaneously, and the whole city resounds at night with thudding
p i l e d ri ve rs at wo r k . If the we ather happens to be dry for a couple of day s , the trees
along the streets will be covered with dust. Some say Shanghai is simply a gi a n t
c o n s t ruction site; o t h e rs say it looks as if it had just surv i ved an indiscri m i n at e
b o m b i n g . People who have been away from a particular area for a few months are
apt to lose their way when they come back, and this has been an experience shared
by many old dwe l l e rs of the city. People tend to complain about taxi dri ve rs
making detours to cheat their customers without realizing that they too are
constantly trying to find their way. The city map of Shanghai has to be updat e d
e ve ry three months.
Huge German supermarkets have started to trade in Shanghai. So have big
Japanese department stores, luxury shops from New York’s Fifth Avenue and
Haagen Dazs ice-cream parlour s. Many other commodities have found their way to
Shanghai as well, such as Shell petrol, French perfume, Swiss chocolate and Philips
electrical appliances. There are also Irish pubs, Kobe style cafés, Bordeaux wine
shops, hard rock bars and even Tex-Mex restaurants, now very much in vogue in
Europe. After long years of impoverishment, people in Shanghai, infused with an
urge for material possession, are now rushing in all directions into shops, real estate
agencies, banks and all other places where money can be made and spent.
In the streets, pedestrians vie for passage with motor vehicles: shoddy taxis
converted from 125cc Happiness brand motorcycles, air-conditioned coaches,
swarms of motorized pedicabs ferrying first-grade pupils and trailing black smoke
behind them, shaky push carts full of construction debris, and imported Cadillacs
belonging to foreign businessmen. In the narrow streets built in the twenties, people
and cars go busily on their way. This is Shanghai today. ■

Street scene in the Pudong district,
the city’s new financial and
commercial centre.
Pedestrians, cyclists and 
motor traffic on Waibadu bridge.
Occupants of old Shanghai
move on as their homes are
demolished.
Lunch break in Huangpu park.

Shanghai is the beacon of the liberalized
Chinese economy and the symbol of its
opening up to the world of international
business. Reform has been speedier and more
radical there than anywhere else in China, and
more foreign capital and state-of-the-art
technology is pouring into Shanghai than into
any other Chinese city.
Situated at the mouth of the Yangtze river,
Shanghai is China’s most populous conurbation,
with 13 million inhabitants. It comprises the city
itself (375 sq. km.) and a dozen satellite towns in
a quadrilateral measuring 120 km (north-south)
by 100 km (east-west).
At the start of the 19th century, it already
had half a million inhabitants. It then became the
main port of entry for colonial powers seeking to
penetrate the Chinese Empire. To some extent it
became a backwater after the communists took
power in 1949 and did not start prospering again
until it was declared a “special economic zone”
in the early 1990s.
The city’s economy is run by a local council
which reports directly to the central government.
It grew by 14 per cent a year between 1992 and
1 9 9 6 , easing off to 12.7 per cent in 1997.Fo r e i g n
direct investment was running at around $10
billion a year during the same period.The average
wage has tripled since 1990 and annual per
capita income is now over $3,000, compared with
only $860 for the rest of China (1997).
The city’s pride is its heavy industry
( s t e e l w o r k s, electric power stations, r e fineries and
s h i p y a r d s ) , machine-tool factories, c o m p u t e r
p l a n t s, textile mills, port activity and especially
finance—the Shanghai stock exchange, P u d o n g ,
is China’s equivalent of Wall Street.
But the effects of the Asian economic crisis
are beginning to be felt. Annual growth has
dropped below 10 per cent and foreign direct
investment fell by almost half in 1997.
Restructuring of state-owned fir m s, in the form of
mergers or shutdowns, has pushed up
u n e m p l o y m e n t , which is officially between 7 and
8 per cent but is thought to be double that.Air
and water pollution and poor waste disposal are
also causing concern. ■
Twilight in the old city.
Shanghai
Beijing ●
