w Sir Y.K. Pao Professor of Law,
Hong Kong University



2 P ro g ress in the South
In traditional societies,
the jury is o u t
on legal re f o r m
w Yash Ghai
Customary laws do not always easily fit into human rights development
t h e o r i e s. But they can play an indispensable  role in ensuring justice
Numerous countries in the South recently
have embraced the idea of the rule of law in
the conviction that legal reform helps nur-
ture nascent democracy and market-ori e n t e d
economic reforms.
Despite ve ry important advantages in establi-
shing a rule of law regi m e , it is neve rtheless a long-
t e rm enterp ri s e . Meanwhile there are certain costs
and problems—so often ignored by legal refor-
m e rs—with the shift to law as a pri m a ry mode of
o r g a n i z ation and framework for policy.
In many societies it is foolish to think of new
legal institutions as a panacea. We cannot assume
that reliance on legal reform will necessarily suc-
c e e d , or that it is appropri ate in all cases.
P s y c h o l o gical attitudes and social conditions
necessary for the rule of law may be absent in cer-
tain societies. The rule of law is not easily establi-
shed in societies where the notion of power is per-
sonalized, rather than located in an office. Nor is
the concept of the limitation of power readily assi-
milated in societies dominated by monarchs or
chiefs or other kinds of hierarchy. States which
are largely agrarian, based on the peasantry and
under the influence of traditional ideologies, are
less likely than largely urban societies to demand
the accountability from their rulers that is essen-
tial for the rule of law. Thus constitutional
reforms in imperial Ethiopia did little to limit or
regulate the government.As a result,introduction
of a rule of law in a Western sense may not only
fail, but also, it could backfire: that is to say, some
of the consequences of reliance on law as a
method of social regulation may be negative.
Contemporary discussions of the strategy of
law tend to overlook the reality of countries that
are largely “pre-modern”. Modernity is associa-
ted with a concept of “rationality” based on a
belief in the scientific method, and confidence
that society can be changed and reformed by
conscious design. Law itself is a deliberate crea-
tion, aimed at clear objectives and regulation. In
that sense the role of state law in modern societies
which have been integrated on the basis of the
economy, particularly the market economy, and
which are closely connected to the apparatus of
the state, can be different from that in societies
which are still dominated by customary values,
institutions and practices.
Cultural factors
and local loyalties
P r e - m o d e rn societies in most Asian and
African states have their own systems of gover-
nance and dispute settlement. Cultural factors
are more, or at least as, important as the econo-
mic. Local loyalties transcend loyalty to the state.
Community pressures are more powerful than
state sanctions in influencing social behaviour.
Justice according to local expectations and by
local institutions is more highly valued than that
of state law and tribunals.
C u s t o m a ry laws and methods do not alway s
easily fit into the human rights development theo-
ries which now dominate the redesign of stat e
s t ru c t u r e s , such as the separation of powe rs or pro-
f e s s i o n a l i z ation of justice. There are undoubtedly
problems with traditional or informal justice. But it
is an important resource and we should attempt to
i m p r ove its effic a cy rather than to eliminate it.
Traditional justice can form the basis of inexpensi-
ve , p a rt i c i p at o ry and accessible forms of justice.

A particularly apt illustration of the role of
customary law comes from the persistence of
belief in witchcraft in a large number of societies.
Many aspects of the community, such as recipro-
city, arrogance or private accumulation of wealth
may be more effectively managed through fear of
punishment for transgressions by witchcraft than
by state regulation. National criminal law may
command little allegiance in a community which
does not identify with the state, and which has its
own moral standards. The weakening of traditio-
nal structures by modern laws may undermine
communal mechanisms which help to maintain
social cohesion.
Thus the emphasis on the law at the expense
of customary systems can have quite unexpected
consequences. It can weaken traditional institu-
tions, for example of dispute resolution, before
the institutions of a rule of law can be fully set up
across a country. It is well known that the tradi-
tional function of dispute settlement was to main-
tain balance and harmony in the community and
therefore it aimed at reconciliat i o n . M o d e rn
methods focus more on retribution and thus may
fail to remove the underlying causes of conflict.
There is widespread feeling in Papua New
Guinea that its problems of crime and violence
are associated with the decline of traditional sanc-
tions.The operation of the institutions of modern
law can put access to justice beyond the means of
the large majority of people, particularly in the
rural areas. Courts or other tribunals may not be
available locally. The apparatus of justice, and
those required to mobilize it, tend to concentrate
in urban centres (in Mozambique, for example, a
recent survey found that only 5 per cent of
lawyers are located outside Maputo, the capital).
Access to justice
Moreover,the financial cost of justice through
a formal legal system is much greater than in tra-
ditional systems (as Western states are discove-
ring). Costs include high salaries and other perks
for judges; the fees of prosecutors and defence
lawyers; construction of buildings, libraries and
remand centres. Rules of fair trial require the pro-
vision of legal aid, at least in trials for serious
offences. Few developing states have adequate
resources for these tasks, at least not without
Customary laws and methods 
do not always easily fit 
into the human rights
development theories 
which now dominate 
the redesign of state 
s t r u c t u re s, such as 
the separation of powers or
p rofessionalization of justice


societies.The assumption behind the present stra-
tegy of law, reflected in foreign assistance for
democratization or conditions for other forms of
assistance, is that there is a unity of purpose bet-
ween democracy and markets, and that similar
institutions and laws serve them both. However,
the law for the market may have a different struc-
ture and dynamics from that for democracy. Law
for democracy is about the empowerment and
protection of all people,particularly the weak; but
law for the market is about conferring power on
the rich and the well organized. Property, a prin-
cipal legal instrument for the market, reduces the
scope for commons, i.e., property owned collecti-
vely, and transforms it into a private entity.
This results in the impoverishment of many
and the enrichment of a few. Property, combined
with another legal instrument for the market,
contract, has become the major means whereby
capitalists own, and exercise control over, the
labour, and other resources, of the poor.
Laws made
by private interests
These developments have at least two adverse
effects on democracy. First, more and more poli-
cies and laws are made at the behest of foreign
states and capital, reducing the scope of national
democratic decision making. Increasingly these
laws are made by private interests, either in inter-
national economic institutions, or more directly
by commercial corporations through joint ven-
tures and arbitration regimes. For example, many
countries have been pressed to bring in legislation
on intellectual property rights, particularly in
genetic engineering, which has opened natural
resources to foreign ownership. In India such
legislation was opposed widely by farmers and
other interest groups, but the government was
under gr e at pressure from the World Tr a d e
Organization (WTO) and the U.S. government to
enact it. Finally, mention can be made of laws or
regulations which have eaten away at workers’
rights,or welfare provisions for education or heal-
th, despite considerable public opposition.
Secondly, there is a distinct shift of domestic
political power to wealthy domestic classes, in
alliance with foreign capital.A large part of these
developments are brought about by and encapsu-
lated in the l aw, which is often imposed, as the
a b ove examples show, and as is illustrated by the
conditions imposed on Korea, Thailand and
Indonesia by the World Bank and the Intern at i o n a l
M o n e t a ry Fund for assistance to them during the
recent financial cri s e s.
I realize that there is no easy answer to the
problems of change.There is undoubtedly a dan-
ger of romanticizing traditional systems, forget-
ting the oppression that takes place within its
interstices. It is sufficient here to warn against the
opposite tendency, the romanticizing of formal
legalized systems,and to urge caution in the stra-
tegy of law. n
diverting them from the more material needs of
the people.
The grafting of a modern legal system on to a
customary one may reduce real access to justice
for some social groups. One reason is that lawyers
are able to use their power to oust from the legal
sector those without full legal qualifications and
to secure monopolies of legal serv i c e s. I n
Cambodia and Mozambique, for example, an
increasingly organized legal profession has exclu-
ded from the system paralegal defenders who pre-
viously rendered important legal services after a
period of six-12 months training, compared with
several years training for lawyers.This has increa-
sed the cost of legal services and has reduced
access to legal representation.
A fair trial
Furthermore, formal systems of justice are
marked by lengthy delays. These are the results
not only of procedural rules, but also of the shor-
tage of lawyers and judges (and sometimes of the
lack of transport to take remand prisoners to
courts). Police are seldom trained or able to cope
with the formal legal system. They lack forensic
and investigative skills, and this leads to long per-
iods of  detention or remand of suspects, or the
use of pressure, sometimes amounting to torture,
to extract confessions. The notion of a fair trial
involves at least one appeal. There is a serious
backlog of cases, and consequently a denial of
justice. At the same time, traditional institutions
which not only would deal expeditiously and
effectively with these cases, but also provide sta-
bility in social relations, are marginalized or abo-
lished. Unencumbered by complex rules of pro-
cedure and restrictions on admissibility of
evidence, traditional leaders were able to settle
disputes speedily.
Formalization of the legal system and the legal
profession may decrease the capacity of the
government itself to make use of the legal system.
This is the consequence of the high salaries that
lawyers can command in the private sector. The
problem is, once again, illustrated by Cambodia
and Mozambique. Top lawyers in both these
countries have gravitated to the private sector,
p a rticularly to service large corp o r at i o n s. A s
governments cannot hire lawyers of equal compe-
tence due to official salary scales, the government
is at considerable disadvantage during negotia-
tions with a corporation or investors as a group.
In both these states, considerable legislative draf-
ting is done by private firms of lawyers; in fact
they, and not the government end by making poli-
cy in crucial public matters. The difficulties for
the government are aggravated as these develop-
ments lead to greater integration of the national
economy into the global system, increasing the
reliance on lawyers with international and com-
parative expertise.
This brings us to a fundamental problem
underlying legal reform in many pre-modern
