21.2 % European Union 10.8 %
21.3 % Belgium 9.0 %
8.1 % Denmark 5.4 %
10.7 % Germany 9.9 %
31.0 % Greece 9.6 %
39.2 % Spain 20.9 %
29.0 % France 12.6 %
15.9 % Ireland 10.2 %
33.6 % Italy 12.4 %
7.3 % Luxembourg 2.5 %
9.7 % Netherlands 5.5 %
7.6 % Austria 5.1 %
14.1 % Portugal 6.6 %
35.4 % Finland 15.0 %
21.9 % Sweden 10.4 %
13.6 % United Kingdom 7.1 %
14 The UNESCO Courier - February 1999
W O R L D  O F  L E A R N I N G



Europe’s welfare- to
In Europe, thousands of ‘companies for jobs’ are trying to teach marginalized
young people and the long-term unemployed how to work
n
In the 15 member-states of the
European Union, the ave r a g e
unemployment rate is nearly 11 per
c e n t , with big va ri ations betwe e n
countries. But there is plenty of work,
especially in the area of the “ s o c i a l
economy”.
This sector, which accounts for 6 per
cent of all jobs in Europe, includes firms
and organizations whose aim is not just to
maximize their profits. They are keen to
increase the quality and accessibility of
their products in addition to the well-
being of their members and employees,
especially by raising their level of
education and training.
Many of them aim more specifically to
help the most marginalized people to bu i l d
up skills and work experience before they
get a regular job. This invo l ves two main
groups: young people who may never have
worked and older long-term unemploye d
p e o p l e . Most of the latter are men, m a ny of
whom worked in traditional industries and
who find the skills that gave them status are
no longer in demand.
They often have multiple problems,
ranging from educational failure to family
and housing problems and alcohol or
drug abuse. Many dropped out halfway
through their secondary schooling and
have difficulty reading and writing. But
they all have their own abilities and skills.
They should not be treated as victims but
as people who can take responsibility for
their own future given proper support.
A stepping-stone 
to the job market
All over Europe, the we l fa r e - t o - wo r k
schemes through training and wo r k
experience which sprang up in the 1970s
have blossomed in the 1990s.They aim to
help people move out of joblessness and
into a form of supported employment
with training.
A study of six countries published by
the European Union and the French
Committee of We l fa r e - t o - work Companies
(CNEI) reported last year that there were
tens of thousands of schemes of this kind in
existence1.They accounted for more than
280,000 jobs, a drop in the ocean
compared with the number needed.They
were also temporary jobs—short - t e rm
contracts ranging from a few months to a
couple of ye a rs. They are not ends in
t h e m s e l ve s. We l fa r e - t o - work schemes are
not meant to create jobs but to be a
stepping stone to the job market. T h e y
could be called “companies for jobs”.
Their name, role and method of
funding va ry from country to country.T h e y
usually get some support from local,
r e gional and national gove rnments and
some of them work in part n e rship with
private firms and trade unions. They take
the form of co-operat i ve s , mutual societies,
associations,foundations and charities.
In Scotland, for example, the W i s e
Group provides jobs in the interm e d i at e
labour market—jobs that range from
r e n ovation of ru n - d own estates to home
i n s u l ation and forestry. Pa rticipants receive
a wage and have to learn the discipline of
work—keeping regular hours and making a
commitment.
In Germ a ny, a new kind of employ m e n t
and professional qualification company
(“Beschaeftigungs und
Q u a l i f i z i e rungsgesellschaft”—BQG) has
emerged since reunification,mainly in the
f o rmer East Germ a ny as a result of the
mass sackings that came with pri vat i z at i o n .
In France, the government provides
incentives for about 800 welfare-to-work
companies (“entreprises d’insert i o n ” )
which have the difficult task of balancing
their books and winning orders in
An operative recycles telephone equipment as part of a French welfare-to-work scheme.
Unemployment rates in the
15 European Union countries 
Unemployment rate (15-
to 24-year-olds)
Total
unemployment
* Simon Wilson is a British policy analyst and consultant.
Thierry Jeantet is a French expert in social economics and
author of l’Economia Sociale in Europa (Ed.Liocorno,
Italy, 1999).

competition with “normal” firms at the
same time as hiring jobless people at the
end of the road and marginalized young
people. “Intermediary associations” and
“neighbourhood committees”, m a i n l y
concerned with community activity in
poor suburbs and with providing local
services, are also growing.
In Italy, l aws are encouraging the
development of some 2,500 “social co-
o p e r at i ve s ” . In Spain, about 1,000
welfare-to-work schemes are operating,
along with 500 “special job workshops.”
All these enterprises work mainly in
the building trade and the services sector,
but also in improving the environment,
recycling, vehicle repair and restaurants.
Some are even breaking into innovative
s e c t o rs such as communications and
biotechnology.
Gaining vocational skills is important.
The jobs of the future will be highly
skilled jobs with a strong technology
component and will involve contact with
p e o p l e . But “companies for jobs” d o
much more than teach their employees
how to paint houses, plant trees, repair
computers or look after old people.They
offer experience of the world of work.
Job insecurity
Thierry Delavaux,who runs a welfare-
to-work firm in a Paris suburb, says:“You
have to focus both on know-how and on
h ow to behave .A young person can learn to
hammer nails in perfectly, but that wo n ’t be
any good if he turns up for job interviews
with a walkman on his head.”
E m p l oye rs need people who are “ j o b
r e a d y ” , people they don’t have to teach
how to read, write and count, how to be
m o t i vated and to communicate with fellow
workers.The first things these job-seekers
have to learn are getting to work on time,
meeting deadlines and working in a team.
Sometimes they have to be encouraged to
buy an alarm clock, helped to plan the route
to their workplace by public transport ,a n d
even need to be accompanied to work for
the first few days.
In a world where professional careers are
constantly changing, they also have to be
taught how to adapt to new and fle x i b l e
working conditions—repeated short-term
contracts, working from home and wider
use of inform ation and communicat i o n
technologies.
This is especially important because
those who find employment after a we l fa r e -
t o - work scheme (less than half of the total)
often move into insecure jobs with low
wages and poor prospects. n
