These children could not afford the price of a ticket and had to plead with the doorman, who later let them in.
Before being admitted to the cinema, street kids are frisked for drugs.

T HE SHELT ERING SCREEN
w Photos by Thys Dullaart, Text by Tomas Dashuber
An all-night cinema offers a haven for Johannesburg’s street children and other homeless people
n
The lights go out and the curtain ri s e s.
Images scored with scratches and rich in
dust particles flicker over the blotchy
s c r e e n . A crackling noise issues from the
l o u d s p e a k e rs as the strip of brittle celluloid
is pulled through the projector.
The art of survival
We are in the Thari Cinema in down-
town Johannesburg.All around are blocks
of tenements and empty office buildings.
Howard, the projectionist, is focusing the
projector before inviting the audience to
enter a world of action and beauty, not to
mention ideals that can probably never be
lived up to.
Around this time it is quiet in central
w Thys Dullaart is a South African photographer 
(see box page 7). Tomas Dashuber is a Belgian-born
photojournalist.

Howard, the projectionist, keeps one eye on the projector and the other, through a hole in the wall, on the screen.
Years ago, Miklos Zenasi escaped communist rule in Hungary. Now a homeless 66-year-old, he spends most
nights in front of the screen.
Jo h a n n e s bu r g . B e t ween about six and
eight o’clock in the evening, employees
quit their offices in the formerly flouri-
shing “City of Gold”. Many head for the
outlying townships. Others drive back to
the carefully-guarded luxury subu r b s
north of Johannesburg. The commuters’
destination depends on the colour of their
skin.
The affluent night owls who, in the
heyday of apartheid, drove downtown in
the evening to have a drink in the Carlton
Tower are seldom seen. The city centre
has become a kind of “grey zone”, where
organized crime, prostitution, drug abuse
and rough justice prevail.
Those who remain behind in the city
centre have nowhere to go.They are street
children or incorri gible adve n t u r e rs who
get a kick out of what has been stigmat i z e d
as the “most dangerous town in the wo r l d ” .
All the street children are black boys
most of whom have run away from poor
homes to escape abuse of one kind or
another. On the streets they learn the art
of survival. This means finding a suitable
clan and carving out a place for yourself
in a hierarchy that dictates who wears the
jersey on cold nights. Even if you are free-
zing, the worst enemy is not being cold
but being alone.
A warm place to go
They might have spent the day sca-
venging, begging and stealing.Many sniff
glue. Official shelters for street children,
some run by the churches, provide bunks
and a soup kitchen. On some nights
Samaritans hand out food. But while
almost all the children have spent time at
one of these shelters, they never stay there
too long. Some of them, once their basic
needs have been catered for, head off for
the Thari cinema in Market Street.

Howard rewinds a reel of film.
V I TAL STAT IS T ICS
While South Africa (population 41 million,
area 1.2 million km2) has a per ca p i t a
income ($3,210) which places it among the
middle-income countries, its income disparities
are among the most extreme in the world.
One-third of the population has a “first world”
standard of living, but over half live in “third
world” conditions. In the latter group, almost all
of whose members are black, only half have pri-
m a ry education, only one quarter of households
have access to electricity and running water, and
one third of the children suffer from chronic mal-
nutrition. Unemployment levels are among the
highest in the world. n
Source: World Bank
Cape Town
Johannesburg
Pretoria
Durban
Indian Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
Namibia Botswana
Zimbabwe
Although it is in dire need of renova-
tion, this movie-house has become a kind
of haven, a secure, warm place where
homeless people can find shelter. As well
as street kids, it attracts other underprivi-
leged people who have slipped through
the very loose “net” of the South African
social security system.
The proprietor of the cinema has no
objection to his auditorium being used by
the waifs as a kind of dormitory.The only
condition he insists on is that they do not
consume alcohol or use dru g s. E ve ry
night, between 20 and 30 kids make
themselves as comfortable as possible on
the cinema’s threadbare carpet.
‘It’s like belonging
to a big family’
One regular guest remarks,“It’s pretty
hard to get accepted here, but once yo u
are it’s like belonging to a big family.” He
talks about the hard reality of life in the
m i l l i o n - p o p u l ation city outside. I n s i d e , yo u
can find a place among the rows of dilapi-
d ated seats and see second-rate films packed
with action. Once, when he was spending
the night outside in the street, somebody
stole his shoes while he was asleep.That is
just one more reason to pay two rand (50
cents) for a place to doze between Te rm i n at o r
and Air Force One.
Another regular is 66-year-old Miklos
Zenasi, who comes in about the same
time each evening and looks for his favou-
rite place in the front row. Here he dis-
creetly settles down for the night. Miklos,
who is known to everyone as “The old
man”, openly admits that he is no longer
the wild bull he was once reputed to be.
He deserted from the Hungarian army,
fled the communist regime, and by roun-
dabout routes eventually found his way to
South Africa. Now, he says, he is too old
for that kind of excitement.What’s more,
he adds, pointing to different parts of his
body, he’s a mass of aches and pains. For
a while he lapses into silence before final-
ly revealing that he has spent more nights
in recent years beneath the screen than
anywhere else.
Around six o’clock in the morning,
when A rnold Schwarzenegger has got
even with his last enemy, the city outside
begins to throb with life again. It is time
for the Thari to expel its children for ano-
ther day. It may well see them again in the
evening just as Howard is checking the
focus of the lens for a further round of
dreams. n

A star looks down. From a poster of the film Desperado, Antonio Banderas keeps watch over a man sleeping
in the foyer.
A young boy dozes on the floor beneath the projector’s dazzling beam.

Ramshackle seats are used as mattresses.
A group of boys with eyes glued to the screen . . . until sleep overtakes them.
AN UNOBT RUSI V E
EY E
Thys Dullaart, a 31-year-old South African pho-
t o g rapher on the staff of the Johannesburg
S t a r n ew s p a p e r , won the 1999 World Press Photo
Award (“Daily Life” ca t e g o ry), with the picture
s t o ry on Johannesburg street children from which
photos published in this feature have been selected.
Dullaart worked as unobtrusively as possible using
a small Le i ca ca m e ra. He quotes with approval the
great French photographer Henri Cartier Bresson
who once said “Anyone who wants to catch fis h
should not disturb the water.” In other words, if you
want to take pictures in a cinema, it’s a good idea
not to disturb the performance.
“Living and working in Johannesburg has
taught me many things about street children,” he
says. “Eager to see their response to the Thari
cinema photos, I arranged for some of the boys fea-
tured in them to meet me at the annual World Press
Photo Exhibition. I was amazed when they com-
mented instead on a story about street children in
Romania. ‘But they are white,’ was their initial
reaction, followed by a discussion which gave me
the impression that it was themselves they saw in
those photos from Romania.” T. D. n

Another action drama comes to an end in front of a sleepy audience.
Some of the ushers were once homeless themselves.
