The USSR used its mighty, gold medal-winning sports machine 
to help build patriotism. Now, the new republics of the former Soviet empire
are trying the same trick. So far, to no avail
New players, same game
Lincoln Allison*
n
The former Soviet Union today is a land of
ove r gr own pitches, broken goal posts and bent
basketball hoops.The widespread decrepitude
is a dismal reminder that Soviet sport was an arti-
ficial construction shaped to state purposes.
Abandoning Soviet disdain for “ b o u r g e o i s ”
s p o rt , in the 1940s Stalin invested massively in a pro-
gramme to develop athletic excellence.The overt
r e a s o n , as with the space progr a m m e , was to
demonstrate the capacities of the Soviet system to
the rest of the world. In fact, the more important
effect was probably in the “near abroad” of the
fourteen non-Russian Soviet republics, where the
regime encouraged people to be patriotic towards
both their particular national culture and towards
the much larger “Soviet Motherland”.
In short,gold medals were used to bring cohe-
sion to a disparate empire marked by ethnic and
inter-regional tensions.
Premier Olympic power
The policy wo r k e d .S oviet sporting success in the
Olympic Games was massive : the USSR headed the
medals table in the summer games on seven out of
eight occasions between 1952 and 1980. It is true
that this success did not extend much beyond the
O l y m p i c s : when it came to sports that existed pro-
fessionally in the West the USSR either underper-
formed (as in soccer) or failed to develop at all (as
in golf). But the Olympics were able to sell them-
s e l ves as the wo r l d ’s premier sporting event and the
S oviet Union was able to sell itself as the wo r l d ’s pre-
mier Olympic power.
When the political edifice collapsed so did its
sports system.
Now the new republics are once again flirting
with the idea of investing in sport as a means of bu i l-
ding a national identity. People in the Republic of
Georgia, for example, have often been shocked to
d i s c over that We s t e rn e rs know almost nothing about
them. In their own minds their nation has been a
cradle of European and Christian civilization, the
place where wine,cultivated wheat and alphabetic
w riting all ori gi n at e d .T h at most people in the We s t
a s s o c i ate “ G e o r gi a ” with Atlanta rather than T b i l i s i
is deeply depressing to Georgians.
Eduard Shevardnadze, President of the Repu-
blic of Georgi a , once remarked that a single football
m atch could highlight the existence of the Georgi a n
nation as nothing else could.
In this context, the qualifying competition for the
1998 World Cup, in which Georgia was in the same
group as England and Italy, was an import a n t
opportunity to put the country on the mental map
of many people in the West.Visiting Tbilisi for the
g a m e , I was impressed by the sense that Georgi a n s
had few aspirations to win or qualify, but were des-
perate to put on a good show.
But it seems the decline of sports in the form e r
S oviet Union will be virtually impossible to reve rs e ,
and sports will not prove to be a tool for political
purposes in the new republics. The reason is that
identification with national teams cuts no ice in a
context of economic collapse and ethnic hatred.
When interviewing people recently in the Repu-
blic of Georgi a , I found that there was no gr a s s r o o t s
sporting culture capable of keeping things going.
F u rt h e rm o r e , the vo l u n t a ry principle which sustains
sport at grassroots level in the West was a concept
that people did not even understand.
The exceptions will be in highly commercial
sports where there are still good coaches and large
sums of money to be made in the new global labour
market for successful playe rs : football and tennis are,
p e r h a p s , the prime examples. There is, by local
standards,enormous money to be made from the
sale of local players to the West and by competing
in European competitions.
For now, in Georgia at least, it seems that the
only real hope is that outsiders will come to the
rescue. “We will have great athletes and coaches
a g a i n ,” I was repeatedly told in my Georgian trave l s ,
“when the capitalists come and invest money in
our sports facilities and training programmes.” n
* Director, the Warwick Centre for
the Study of Sport,UK
Young Georgian footballers
training outside the national
stadium.
