“We can’t predict the future, but we can prepare it,” chemistry Nobel laureate Ilya
P ri g o gine once observe d . For the most part , the future will be what we make of it, e ve n
if by definition and through circumstance its fabric consists of uncertainty, change
and unpredictable creation.
Two major upheavals have profoundly changed our vision of the wo r l d .F i rs t , the scien-
tific revolution has taken us from an age of certainty and dogmatism and plunged us in
an ocean of uncertainty and doubt. We believed in the predictability of phenomena
governed by the imperious certainties of science:now the paradigms of determinism are
yielding to a concept of nature and history whose hallmark is uncertainty. Secondly, the
third industrial revo l u t i o n , based on the inform ation age and the rapid introduction of new
technology into all facets of human life, is changing the world into a global one.
Pa r a d ox i c a l l y, this globalizat i o n , far from creating a homogeneous global society,
whether desired or deplored, is subjecting societies to a logic of disintegr at i o n . It is a logi c
of selective pairi n g s , of exclusive gr o u p i n g s , of separat i o n , rifts and disaffil i at i o n .The highly
a s y m m e t ric economic success of a system which is based on the concept of liberty but has
forgotten equality and solidarity is a virtual political failure: it is coupled with an ethical
vacuum and with a complete lack of purp o s e .The power of globalization is devoid of mea-
ning.
In the face of these fractures and this va c u u m , four challenges must be fa c e d .The firs t
is that of peace, which is the precondition for successfully tackling all the others. Since the
end of the Cold Wa r , a fourth cat e g o ry of countries has appeared on the intern ational stage,
in addition to the industrialized and developing countries and those in transition. I t
comprises countries at war or emerging from conflict in which the state has often foun-
dered in genocide and intercommunal massacres.
The second challenge: will the coming century witness the onset of a new kind of pove rt y
whose victims will live side by side with unprecedented wealth? According to the United
N ations Development Progr a m m e , in 1960 the 20 per cent of the wo r l d ’s people who live
in the richest countries had 30 times the income of the poorest 20 per cent—by 1995 they
had 82 times as much income.
Sustainable development and the wise management of the global environment pose
the third gr e at challenge. E ve rywhere humanity is draining the resources which could have
fed tomorr ow ’s generat i o n .We have to find our way towards another type of deve l o p m e n t ,
one that is more economic, more intelligent, more cari n g . Because humanity has acquired
the technical capacity to commit collective suicide, it has to learn to assume the “ m a s t e ry
of mastery”,in the words of French philosopher Michel Serres.
The fourth challenge is that of the “erratic boat”syndrome.As a result of globaliza-
t i o n ,m a ny states appear to have mislaid their maps, compasses and direction-finding ins-
t ru m e n t s ,e ven the will to set a cours e .They are tossed about by the wave s , as though his-
t o ry had fallen into the hands of “ a n o nymous masters ” who can no longer be
controlled—financial markets,raw materials markets, statistics of all kinds.
But awareness of these problems has sharpened and solutions exist:hope remains. If
only we can find a way to give millions and millions of silent people a real opportunity to
use their freedom of thought and of speech, we would see the decisions of the mighty bow
to the only power that counts: that of the people.
G l o b a l i z ation must never remain confined to only the netwo r k s , t e l e c o m m u n i c a-
tions, computers, the media world or markets. It will have to be based on the consolida-
tion of a public democratic space worldwide.It is only on this condition that we will suc-
ceed in rendering globalization humane, making it a project with truly unive rsal promise,
and giving it a meaning.
This is the course we must plot for the twenty-first century. n
F OUR CH A L L ENGES 
F OR A NEW WORL D
Federico Mayor
The issues and proposals
outlined in this editorial are
developed by  Federico Mayor
in his  recently published book
Un Monde Nouveau.1
Federico Mayor has served
as Director-General of UNESCO
for twelve years. His second
mandate at the head of the
Organization comes to an end
in November 1999. 
The nomination of his
successor is a key item on the
agenda of UNESCO’s forthcoming
G e n e ral Conference 
(October 26-November 17).
Each member state has a vote
within this sovereign body 
of UNESCO.
1. Un Monde nouveau by Federico
Mayor, in collaboration with Jérôme
Bindé of UNESCO’s Analysis and
Forecasting Office (Editions Odile
Jacob, Paris). The English version, 
“The World Ahead: our Future in the
Making” is forthcoming.
