Pe r u ’s ‘meet the people’ tours
The European Union and the Peruvian government are setting up a scheme for alternative 
tourism that benefits host communities
Pe ru , the cradle of ancient civilizations and the
home of active indigenous communities, i s
attracting more and more tourists who want to
get away from the old “See a country in seven day s
and nights” package and is putting more and more
emphasis on its cultural and archaeological assets.
Until recently, however, key elements like contact
with local people have been neglected.
To put things right, the European Union and
the Committee to Promote Peru (PromoPerú)
launched a jointly funded 1m-euro programme in
1996 to develop the country’s tangible and intan-
gible cultural attractions “from within”.
The scheme, whose joint director is a Belgian
tourism consultant, Lieve Coppin, is known as
the “ I n t e gr ated Support Programme for the
Development of Tourism in Peru”. It grew out of
a series of seminars involving public and private
bodies, local associations and rural communities.
The job that had to be done was no sinecure.
Factors such as terrorism and a cholera epidemic
which broke out in 1990 and ravaged the country
between 1991 and 1993 had reduced Peru’s
attractiveness as a tourist destination. Many ser-
vice companies went bankrupt and the tourist
industry suffered.
After nearly two years of fieldwork which took
Coppin all over the country, six “ d e ve l o p m e n t
z o n e s ” were chosen—three in the south (Barrio de
San Blas, U rubamba and Ollantaytambo) and three
in the north (Olleros-Chavín,Túcume and Caja-
m a r c a ) . A hundred or so proposals were consi-
dered from these areas, of which 31 were accepted.
W riting guidebooks, designing posters and lea-
fle t s , making maps of the sites and creating Intern e t
websites for communities where sometimes little
Spanish was spoken were some of the most urgent
tasks done by the scheme, which allotted betwe e n
$20,000 and $40,000 to each project.
The result is tourist packages that strengthen
cultural identity, respect the environment, active-
ly involve local communities and make a profit.
Among the tours on offer are “Posada Amazonas”
(“Explore the Tambopata jungle with the Ese’eja
people,” as the brochure says), “Willoc, Living
Inca Art and Culture” (“Learn with an Indian
family about the art of weaving modern tapestry
with ancient ya rn”) and “ Pe ru Llama Tr e k ”
(“Villagers and their llamas will take you to the
sources of Andean culture”).
Tourism with 
cultural identity
E l s e w h e r e , the attraction of prestigi o u s
archaeological sites like Machu Picchu has been
used to develop tourism in nearby communities.
For example, the salt pans at Maras
(“Participatory Tourism in Urubamba”), draw
very few of the many tourists who every day visit
the spectacular ancient Inca city just over an hour
away.The project aims to extend Machu Picchu’s
sphere of influence to Maras, where visitors can
take part in activities like extracting the salt using
methods handed down over the generations and
will be guided around by the villagers themselves.
However, in trying to market these tours, the
organizers have encountered a certain lack of
enthusiasm on the part of tour operators who
regard the projects as competition, albeit on a
small scale.Another problem is lack of inspection
of arrangements that might clash with internatio-
nal consumer protection laws. To overcome these
obstacles, the flow of information must be impro-
ved between local tour operators, foreign travel
agents and customers.
The next step is to get the authorities to treat
tourism as a major economic activity. Only then
will such projects become part of a medium and
long-term plan through which Peru will be able to
fulfil the main goal of the programme, to offer
“tourism with cultural identity”. n
w Leticia Gonzáles de Remoué
