When Alexei Perchuk joined Moscow’s presti-
gious Institute of Geology, Mineralogy, Petro-
chemistry and Geochemistry in 1987, he was
looking forward to a glittering career in the best tra-
dition of Soviet science. The son of an eminent
university professor and,like him, a petrochemist,
the 24-year-old graduate was fulfilling a dream of
many fellow students at that time, for whom a job
as a researcher was still a great honour.
Today only Academicians still have real status.
Rank and file researchers like Perchuk no longer
do. A 1996 public opinion poll by Moscow’s
Centre for Science Research and Statistics sho-
wed that the three most prestigious professions in
Russia were business, banking and politics. The
three least respected groups were researchers, the
military and engineers. Very low pay—Perchuk
earns about 800 rubles ($30) a month—has com-
pletely devalued the work of scientists and engi-
neers.
To escape poverty, Russian scientists have
three choices—go into industry and earn about
$100 a month, become a “businessman” and
hope to earn millions, or go abroad. A dozen of
Perchuk’s friends have already made up their
minds—half of them have gone into business and
the rest have left the country.
Perchuk himself hasn’t decided yet. His affec-
tion for his country and his work still overrides his
money problems. Financially speaking, the insti-
tute where he works belongs to the privileged few
that have been given priority status by the govern-
ment. As a result, its scientists work in good
conditions and none of them has yet left for
abroad. But while there have been no departures,
no one new has been hired for the past 10 years.
This means that after 12 years, Perchuk is still
one of the Institute’s youngest researchers.
At national level, the situation is catastrophic.
UN E S C O’s 1998 Wo rld Science Report s ays Russia
had about 900,000 scientists involved in research
and development (R&D) when the Soviet Union
collapsed in 1991. Four ye a rs later there were only
half a million.The figures are similar in other form e r
S oviet republics, especially in A rm e n i a , where R&D
scientists fell from 15,000 to only 3,000 over the
same period.
EU initiatives
Since 1993, the European Union has become
the main partner of Russia and the other former
m e m b e rs of the Soviet Union grouped as the Com-
munity of Independent States (CIS).1 It has stepped
up its aid in the hope of giving new life to its own
research and helping the ex-Soviet scientists. C o m-
mitments so far total about $155 million.
The Intern ational A s s o c i ation for the Promotion
of Co-operation with Scientists from the Newly
Independent States of the Former Soviet Union
( I N TAS) has so far backed more than 1,200 projects
to the tune of $69 million.The Intern ational Science
and Technology Centre (ISTC), founded in
M o s c ow in 1994, has sunk more than $120 million
into projects mainly to do with conve rsion from mili-
tary research.
In Fe b ru a ry 1999, the European Union and
the Russian Fe d e r ation reached agreement on a
project for scientific and technological co-operat i o n .
A p a rt from cash, the accord enables the signat o ri e s
to take part in each other’s research programmes,
except in nuclear mat t e rs.The main fields are space
r e s e a r c h , t e l e c o m m u n i c at i o n s , e nvironment and
transport.
The five main co-operation programmes with
Western countries (the European Union,Sweden,
N o r way, I c e l a n d , S w i t z e r l a n d , I s r a e l , the United
S t ates and Canada) add up to about $320 million.
Will this be enough to halt the brain drain? If this
money was used to pay the CIS’s 750,000 resear-
chers a monthly salary of $1,000,it would only be
enough to pay half of them, for one month. n
* UNESCO Courier journalist



Low wages and a poor public image have forced more than 
half Russia’s scientists to quit science in the last 10 years. International co-operation 
is trying to repair the damage
FORMER USSR:halting the brain dra i n
Jasmina Sopova*
“ F re e d o m
is for science wh at air
is for an animal.”
Henri Poincaré,
French mathematician
(1854-1912)
1 The CIS,set up in 1991, covers 99.2 per cent of the area
of the former USSR and is home to 97.2 per cent of its
population.
