◗ Rithy Panh’s films include
Site 2 (1989), Cambodia:
Between War and Peace (1991)
Rice People (1994) and One
Evening after the War (1997).
I
left Cambodia when I was 15 with a spiritual
wound I knew would never heal. I had survi-
ved the terrible ordeal of the Khmer Rouge
genocide, which killed a quarter of the country’s
population. I didn’t understand how such a mas-
sacre had been possible. Even now, I hardly do.
As soon as I reached the camp at Mairu t , in T h a i-
l a n d , I stopped fearing for my life, but I felt a pro-
found sadness, whereas I should have been happy. I
felt my whole life was already behind me, t h at it
belonged to those ye a rs of struggle for surv i va l .
I wanted to forget. Go somewhere else, where
I’d have no memory and no recollections, where
nobody would know what I’d been through. I’d
seen and heard my relatives suffer. Our family
had been deported from Phnom Penh to Chrey, a
village in the middle of nowhere. One of my sis-
ters was brought back to my parents, physically
and psychologically exhausted after bu i l d i n g
dikes and digging canals. Soon afterwards, my
father died. He was a peasant’s son who had
become a teacher and then a primary school ins-
pector. He decided to stop eating.He chose to die
as an act of rebellion, a last act of freedom.Then,
one after another, my mother, my sisters and my
nephews died of hunger or exhaustion.
SurvivorÕs guilt
I didn’t want to talk about any of that . I had
made it part of my s e l f, and it became almost the
m a i n s p ring of my surv i va l .When I was living as an
exile in France, there was a long period when I refu-
sed to speak my nat i ve language and rejected any
link with Cambodia. I had been uprooted and I felt
s o m e h ow incomplete, t o rn between forgetting and
r e m e m b e ri n g, b e t ween past and present, a lways ill
at ease. I lived with memories of my relat i ve s , w i t h
the anxiety—the cert a i n t y — t h at the same tragi c
s t o ry would repeat itself. It was bu rned into my
flesh foreve r , as if with a branding iron, t h at this is
w h at the world is like: a place where there’s a lot of
indifference and hy p o c risy and little compassion.
When you come out of a wa r ,yo u ’re not sure that
yo u ’ ve left violence behind yo u .You are locked in a
culture of surv i va l .And when yo u ’ ve surv i ved geno-
c i d e1, you always feel guilty about being a surv i vo r.



Cambodia: a w o u n d
that will not heal
◗ Rithy Pa n h
A Cambodian film-maker describes how he came to terms with horro r. His country will neve r
re c over its lost identity, he says, unless it puts the past on trial
When the Italian writer Primo Levi came back
from the Nazi death camps, he said that “you feel
others have died in your place, that we’re alive
because of a privilege we haven’t deserved,becau-
se of an injustice done to the dead. It isn’t wrong
to be alive, but we feel it is.”
Long afterwa r d s , I learned to speak again and
to accept what had happened to me.Then I redis-
c overed my memori e s , my ability to imagi n e , t o
l a u g h , to dream, to rebuild my life. In Cambodia,
they say people who’ve died a violent death can’t
be reincarn at e d , t h at the souls of dead people who
h ave n ’t had a religious funeral and bu rial wa n d e r
the earth foreve r , haunting the living. There are
bones all over the place in the country s i d e . Pe o p l e
find them whenever they start bu i l d i n g .
A machine to destroy memory
If you can’t grieve, the violence continues.The
Cambodian mother of a model family, well inte-
grated in France, cut off her child’s head just as
the Khmer Rouge killers had chopped off her
fat h e r ’s. Similar cases have occurred in
C a m b o d i a . At Preah Sihanouk Hospital in
Phnom Penh, the only department that provides
psychiatric treatment takes patients from all over
the country. Sometimes there are 250 of them
waiting in the corridor.You only have to see how
many are depressive and destitute to realize that
something must be done.There is a massive col-
lective wound.
The terrible thing about past wars and about
the Cambodian genocide is not only the millions
of dead, the widows, the orphans, the amputees
and the depressed, it’s also our shattered identity,
the ruins of our social cohesion.
The first political decisions of the Khmer
Rouge, after they won power on April 17, 1975,
were unutterably violent. They emptied towns
and hospitals, closed schools, abolished money,
deported people en masse to the countryside,
defrocked monks and looted old houses.2
“Absolutely everything belongs to Angkar [the
communist party],” they said. “If the party tells
you to do something you must do it! Anyone who

1. The author use this word in its broader sense; contrast
UN’s stricter definition, see page 20.
2. The Khmer Rouge divided the Cambodian people into
two categories: the “old”people living in rural areas and
the “new”people in the cities who were “tainted” by
culture and knowledge.

objects is an enemy, anyone who opposes is a
corpse.” People had to dress in black, change the
way they spoke, use certain words and exclude
others from their vocabulary. It was forbidden to
sing, dance, say prayers and even talk to other
people. My father, who had spent all his life
trying to improve Cambodia’s public education
system, was particularly worried about the deci-
sion to ban teaching.“The spade is your pen, the
rice-paddy is your paper,” was the message
Angkar drove home.
All social classes were affected to varying
degrees by mass deportations to the countryside,
forced labour, summary executions and famine.
Paradoxically, all these absurd sacrifices were
made in the name of restoring the glory of the
Angkor era.All the roots of our culture and iden-
tity, the basic social relationships and symbolic
links which attached Cambodians to their world
were methodically and deliberately attacked and
destroyed.
Most of the detention centres were set up in
pagodas, places of prayer and compassion, or in
s c h o o l s , places of know l e d g e . A n g k a r was a
machine for destroying identity and wiping out
memory.
Before they executed their victims, the killers
tortured them and made them write hundreds of
pages of false confessions dictated by Khmer
Rouge officials. After being forced to denounce
their families and friends, the prisoners were exe-
cuted. “By eliminating you,” Angkar said, “we
don’t lose anything. It’s better to wrongly arrest
somebody than to wrongly let somebody go.”
One of the executioners at Camp S-21, in
Tuol Sleng—Pol Po t ’s main torture centre—
today only expresses his “regrets”; he doesn’t feel
guilty. He destroyed non-persons, people the
Khmer Rouge had stripped of all humanity.
This genocide was “ s i l e n t ” . The Khmer
Rouge imposed a reign of terror, and most execu-
tions were carried out without witnesses and
without noise.The world let Cambodians die and
didn’t seem to care. Not many people denounced
the massacres.
When I arrived in France in 1979, I was ama-
zed to find that the Khmer Rouge still occupied
Cambodia’s seat at the United Nations. A few
years later, I took the absence of the word “geno-
cide” from the Paris peace accords as a refusal to
allow the survivors to remember, as an insult to
the victims’ dignity.

Survivors should have the courage to confront their history as Òa debt owed to the dead and 
an obligation to their childrenÓ.

Film director Rithy Panh in Cambodia in March 1999
during the shooting of a documentary film about the
installation of a trans-Cambodian optic fibre cable.
Human bones were discovered when trenches for the
cable were dug.
I went back to Cambodia in 1990 after 11 ye a rs
in exile. I wanted to find the surv i vo rs of my fa m i l y
and recover the remains of the dead and gi ve them
a proper bu ri a l , so their souls would stop wa n d e-
ring the earth and could be reincarn ated in the cy c l e
of life and deat h . I wanted at least to confirm they
had died,so I could start to mourn properly.
I went to Tuol Sleng camp, which has been tur-
ned into a “genocide museum”. I wanted to try to
find a photo of my uncle among the hundreds of
pictures of the dead pinned on the wa l l s. But I
couldn’t bring myself to go in.I went back in 1991
to film the few surv i vo rs of the camp (only seven out
of some 15,000 people who passed through it). I
wanted to understand the banalization of evil and
the dehumanizing machinery of the Khmer Rouge.
But we ’re afraid of this recent past. C a m b o d i a n s
who dare to talk about it are divided. Some think we
should forget and look to the future, t h at there’s no
point in inflicting another ordeal on ours e l ves by try i n g
to bring back memories and pick over old wo u n d s.
They fear that if trials are held they will revive seri o u s
political quarrels which might set off another civil wa r.
Or else they generalize about Cambodians and say
most of them are “ fat a l i s t i c ” and accept a history of
war and genocide as their “ k a rm a ” .
This approach was dismissed by a 30-year-old
peasant called Torng, who was typical of many
people I spoke to while I was filming. “The
Khmer Rouge didn’t just kill people,” he said.
“They turned our generation into ignoramuses,
animals, idiots, who don’t know where they’re
going.We didn’t study. All we know is how to use
our physical strength. So we can only get jobs as
peasants or labourers. The Khmer Rouge should
be put on trial. If they aren’t, people like me will
be tempted to take revenge.”
I believe ,and so do others ,t h at we should face up
to our history, so that our relat i ves and friends didn’t
die in va i n .M o u rning wo n ’t be possible unless moral
and political responsibility for the Cambodian geno-
cide is established.A trial of the Khmer Rouge, b e f o-
re the Cambodian people, is absolutely essential.We
h ave to gi ve meaning to basic ideas of law and justi-
ce in this country. In a democratic society, you can’t
kill without being punished.
We must gi ve our memory a fair and dignifie d
t rial in order to understand the past. I’m not bothe-
red about the sentences that would be handed dow n .
Only the truth can free us—the whole tru t h ,h owe-
ver horri fic.The other point of such a tri a l , which is
just as import a n t , would be to restore our identity.
The Khmer Rouge have plunged generations of Cam-
bodians into a vicious circle of cultural loss.
Not many Cambodians tell their children about
the genocide, which is a fuzzy corner of their
memory. But we can’t build our future by forget-
t i n g .The surv i vo rs must tell their stories and ensure
t h at the memory of what happened is handed dow n
from the past to the present.We owe a debt to the
dead and we have an obligation to our children.
We shan’t be able to get rid of this 30-year
culture of violence, cast out the monster that is
fear and put behind us the collective guilt we feel
as survivors unless we manage to understand our
history. ■
