m i l i t a ry spending by 19 per cent and 12
per cent respective l y. Notable examples in
the low-income group include South A s i a n
c o u n t ri e s , China and some A f rican coun-
t ri e s , and in the middle-income gr o u p
such Mediterranean countries as A l g e ri a ,
L e b a n o n ,S y ria and Tu r k e y. G r owing mili-
t a ry budgets not only eat into spending on
human deve l o p m e n t , but also heighten the
risk that arms will be used to deal with
political cri s e s.
Asia is the continent where the gr owth in
m i l i t a ry expenditure has been strongest.
I n d i a , Pa k i s t a n , S ri Lanka, C h i n a , I n d o-
n e s i a , Ja p a n , M a l ay s i a , M ya n m a r , S i n g a-
p o r e , Ta i wa n ,T hailand and South Korea
h ave all increased their budgets signific a n t l y
in recent ye a rs , although as a rule by a



No farewell Vincenç Fi s a s *
to arms
n
Judging purely by the figures, the
“ d i s a rmament race” which began
after the fall of the Berlin Wall in
1989 appears to have yielded some tan-
gible results. Political détente between the
major powers led not only to the conclu-
sion of agreements for the withdrawal and
destruction of weapons, but also to a
reduction of military expenditure in many
countries.
H owe ve r , careful scru t i ny of the
figures reveals a more complex and para-
doxical picture. It shows that a decade
after the “disarmament” process began
there are conflicting trends, some of
which provide few grounds for optimism.
The reduction effort has not been the
same everywhere.What is more alarming,
many countries and entire regions have
begun to rearm.
World military expenditure has fallen
by about one-third since 1988. In 1997 it
was running at $740 billion (equivalent to
roughly $2 billion a day, or 2.6 per cent of
global GDP, compared with $3 billion a
day at the end of the 1980s).
Contrasting 
trends
The first point to note, however, is
that this reduction is due basically to cuts
made in Europe and in the United States.
And while Europe heads the list with a
drop of over 50 per cent in the last deca-
de (see table), this spectacular decrease is
chiefly due to the reduction which began
in Russia in 1992. In Western Europe, the
reduction in military spending has been
far more modest, around 14 per cent.
The second point is that while the
high-income countries have reduced the
size of their military systems and the cor-
responding expenditure, the low- and
middle-income countries have increased
The great powers might have cut down on military expenditure, but low- and
middle-income countries have boosted their spending. In Asian countries
alone, arms purchases have doubled in four years.
*Holder of the UNESCO Chair of Peace 
and Human Rights at the Autonomous University of
Barcelona,Spain
Tanks ready for the scrapyard at Rockensussra,Germany.

lesser percentage than the rise in their GDP.
A substantial part of the increase has gone
into buying new weapons—expenditure on
a rms purchases doubled between 1994 and
1997.This trend may be expected to slow
d own in the next few ye a rs ,h owe ve r , for two
reasons—the financial crisis that has affected
many of the region’s economies and pres-
sure from the Intern ational Monetary Fund
for these countries to reduce government
expenditure,including military spending.
L atin A m e rica has not escaped the
temptation to rearm.Military expenditure
in South America rose by 14 per cent over
the last decade, notably in Brazil, C h i l e
and Pa r a g u ay. In the last few ye a rs purcha-
sing of new we a p o n s , some extremely
e x p e n s i ve , has also increased. Central A m e-
ri c a , which for decades was one of the
regions worst ravaged by armed conflicts,
constitutes an exception. In the last decade,
it has actually reduced its military expen-
diture by almost 40 per cent following the
conclusion of peace agreements.
In the Middle East, a traditionally lucra-
t i ve market for arms export e rs , m i l i t a ry
spending has also followed an upward trend,
especially in Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria.
In Africa, on the other hand, only Algeria
and Uganda have increased their military
bu d g e t s , and sub-Saharan A f rica as a whole
has reduced military expenditure by no less
than 46 per cent. But the civil wa rs and
cruel massacres that have occurred throu-
ghout the decade prove once again that the
b rutality of conflicts and the numbers of vic-
tims they claim are not necessarily linked to
the acquisition of sophisticat e d , costly we a-
ponry. The proliferation of light weapons,
easily acquired and inexpensive (500 million
units worldwide) is not sufficiently refle c t e d
in the statistics of military expenditure. It is
enough to point out that 200,000 assault
rifles can be had at discount prices for the
cost of a single fighter plane.
Smaller armies,
new equipment
Variations in military expenditure can
be explained by two major parameters:
the size of armies and the type and quan-
tity of armaments they acquire. Among
the major powers a third factor comes
into play, namely the cost of research and
development in the military sector.
According to the U.S. Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (ACDA), the
n u m b e rs of military personnel in the
world’s armies fell by some six million
between 1988 and 1995 (to 22.8 million
in 1995),a drop of 20 per cent.This helps
to explain the aggregate reduction in mili-
tary expenditure. There are major diffe-
rences between regi o n s , h owe ve r. T h e
World military
expenditures
(Billions of dollars, constant 1995 prices)
1988 1997 % variation
Africa 12.6 8.8 -30
North 2.2 3.2 +45
Sub-Saharan 10.4 5.6 -46
Americas 410.0 290.0 -29
North 390.0 268.0 -31
Central 0.8 0.5 -39
South 19.2 21.9 +14
Asia 95.0 120.0 +26
East 83.8 106.0 +27
South 11.2 13.6 +22
Europe 500.0 234.0 -53
Middle East 39.6 43.3 +9
Oceania 8.9 8.8 -1
Total 1066.0 704.0 -34
Source: SIPRI (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute),
SIPRI Yearbook 1998, p. 192
d e veloped countries cut their arm e d
forces by more than 35 per cent,the deve-
loping countries by only 10 per cent on
ave r a g e . The percentage reductions in
n u m b e rs in Central A m e rica (60 per
c e n t ) , E a s t e rn Europe (44 per cent),
North America (25 per cent) and Western
Europe (17 per cent) bear a clear relation
to cuts in military budgets.This is not the

case, however, in regions such as the
Middle East, which have offset decreased
numbers with the modernization of their
a rmies and purchases of equipment.
Numbers of military personnel increased
slightly in Latin America and South Asia.
Since 1990, military expenditure on
defence equipment has fallen by a quar-
ter. In the countries of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), expenditu-
re on equipment fell by one-third between
1988 and 1997, when it amounted to $95
b i l l i o n . These figures stand in contrast to
the sales of the hundred leading arm s - p r o-
ducing companies which, according to
SIPRI (Stockholm Intern ational Pe a c e
Research Institute) dat a , reached the sub-
s t a n t i a l figure of $156 billion in 1996.
Thirty-nine of the companies, half of
them American, clocked up annual mili-
tary sales in excess of one billion dollars.
SIPRI estimates research and deve-
lopment expenditure at $58 billion in
1995, of which $48 billion were accoun-
ted for by NATO countries ($37 billion
by the United States alone). Since 1989,
this type of expenditure has fallen in most
countries. Three noteworthy exceptions
are Japan, India and South Korea, all
three of which have increased their overall
military spending, in absolute terms, in
the last decade.
Expenditure on research, which chiefly
concerns the nuclear powers, accounts for
14 per cent of total military spending in
the United Stat e s , 11 per cent in France, 9 . 5
per cent in the United Kingdom, 5 per cent
in Russia and around 4 per cent in China.
It accounts for 10 per cent of Swe d e n ’s
military expenditure and more than 5 per
cent of that of India, Germany and South
Africa.All these countries,plus Spain and

Ja p a n , account for more than 90 per cent of
world expenditure on armaments research.
What happened 
to the peace dividend?
When the process of reducing military
expenditure began, the idea was for disar-
mament to serve development and for a
“peace dividend” to be created with the
savings that would accrue. What was the
outcome of that commendable initiative?
According to a United Nations Develop-
ment Programme (UNDP) report , the total
“peace dividend” worldwide exceeded $900
billion by the mid-1990s, but “Most of the
savings appear to have been committed to
budget deficit reductions and non-deve-
lopment expenditures”.
The figures presented above also indi-
cate that the “peace dividend” is far from
being a universal phenomenon. Unfortu-
nately it is the countries most in need of
resources for their development that spend
most on military activities, often more than
they spend on health or education (see
box).
It is significant that the latest indicator
used by the Bonn International Center
for Conversion (BICC) to measure the
disarmament effort of a list of 157 coun-
tries shows up negative for 69 of them.
This gives a clear idea of the enormous
effort that is still required. n
Sources: SIPRI  Yearbook 1998;World Military
Expenditures and Arms Transfers 1996 (ACDA,
United States, 1997); Conversion Survey 1998
(BICC, 1998)
Dismantling a nuclear weapon at Amarillo, Texas (USA).
