The z e ro option for  
The world may be producing too much waste. It is also spawning plenty
of imaginative ideas about how to handle it
n
The world is groaning under the
weight of the rubbish people produce
and things are getting wo rs e . N o b o d y
k n ows exactly how much waste there is in
the Third Wo r l d , but the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Deve l o p m e n t
(OECD) has produced figures for its 29
m e m b e r - s t at e s , which are mostly ri c h
c o u n t ri e s.
B e t ween 1980 and 1995, it say s , t h e
total amount of municipal waste increased
from 347 to 484 million tonnes—238
million in the United States and 153
million in the 15 countries of the European
U n i o n .
I n d u s t ries alone in the OECD
countries produced 1.5 billion tonnes of
waste in 1995. The French—top of the
agricultural and forest waste league with
377 million tonnes compared with the
Greeks’ 90 million—throw out 17 billion
plastic bags every year. They junk 1.7
million vehicles and discard 20 million
t y r e s. The Germans throw away 4.42
million tons of packaging—a tri f l e
compared with the Americans’ 64 million
t o n n e s. The US is also top where
computers are concerned, scrapping 10
million every year.
Fo rty million tonnes of recy c l a b l e
waste were exported by OECD countries
in 1990.“To reduce flows of materials,we
need a revolution in how we think about
them—a transition as profound as the
movement from the Stone Age to the
Bronze Age,” says John Young, a senior
researcher at the Worldwatch Institute in
Washington. “This revolution, however,
will centre not on a new material, but on
how to use existing materials far more
efficiently.”
What is waste?
There are several definitions.
B e l gi u m , for example, calls it “ a ny
substance or object which the holder
discards or intends or is required to
discard”. As a result the official quantity
of waste in Belgium is high—645,636
tonnes exported in 1991, compared with
only 21,126 exported by France and
108,466 tonnes by the US.
Mexico’s definition of waste is very
complicated: “Any material . . . whose
quality does not permit its use again in
the same process that generated it”. In
Switzerland, “wastes are movable things
which the owner discards or whose
disposal is in the public interest”. In
South Korea, waste means “any matter . .
. which becomes unnecessary for human
living or business activities”.
The OECD notes an extra problem to
do with differentiating between the word
“discard” in the definitions—meaning to
get rid of, scrap or abandon—and
“ d i s p o s a l ” , which means destru c t i o n ,
removal, emptying or dumping.These are
quite varied solutions.
The amount of waste exported does
not necessarily match the amount
imported, since the definition of such
material can change when it crosses a
national border. If used tyres are exported
as waste to a country with laxer rules,
they become an ordinary commercial
item when imported there.
So tracking the intern at i o n a l
m ovement of waste is a nightmare.
Especially as the cost of recycling and
dumping varies from country to country.
The cheapest disposal method, if you
manage to dodge customs, is still to
smuggle 
i n , s ay, used tyres and dump them 
on waste ground without regard to the
environment.
“The culture of consumption that has
spread since mid-century from Nort h
America to Western Europe, Japan and a
wealthy few in developing countries has
brought with it an unprecedented
appetite for physical goods—and the
materials from which they are made,” says
Young.“In the United States, the average
person accounts for the use of some 540
tonnes of construction mat e ri a l s , 1 8
tonnes of paper, 23 of wood, 16 of metals
and 32 tonnes of organic chemicals in the
course of a lifetime.”
So it is vital to reduce consumption 
of raw mat e rials and minimize waste 
production.
The three Rs—reduce,
re-use, recycle
Most industrialized countries have
passed laws about waste based on the
three Rs—reduce, re-use and recycle.The
‘The culture of consumption that has spread since mid-
century from North America to Western Europe, Japan and
a wealthy few in developing countries has brought with it
an unprecedented appetite for physical goods and the
materials from which they are made’A re f o restation and resin extraction project 
in Colombia.

laws cover several sectors: industry and
packaging, household and organic waste,
paper, vehicle batteries, tyres and oil and
other lubricants. The goal is to cut the
amount at source, especially where
hazardous substances are concern e d ,
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
which attack the ozone layer. The latter
are hard to collect and are gradually being
taken off the market.
Tyres can be re-used to make anti-
noise barriers. Paper can be recycled. But
some waste cannot be dealt with by the
three Rs and has to be incinerated—
which is criticized as polluting the air with
high levels of dioxin gas near the
i n c i n e r at o rs—or dumped, which is
t o l e r ated less and less because of
pollution discharges and the
accompanying bad smells.
To tackle this wo rrying situat i o n
which is very hard to remedy, Belgian
economist Gunter Pauli in 1994 launched
the Zero Emissions Research Initiative
(ZERI) which in effect means “ z e r o
waste”. The scheme is backed by the
Tokyo-based UN University—a network
of unive rsities particularly concern e d
about the environment—and invo l ve s
trying to save everything in industry and
a gri c u l t u r e , t r e ating all waste as raw
material and avoiding pollution at the
same time as making profits and creating
jobs. Quite a few projects were presented
at ZERI’s fourth congress in Windhoek,
Namibia, in October 1998, attended by
250 delegates from five continents. Here
are three of them.
Composting 
a pesky plant
Originally from South America, the
water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) was
introduced elsewhere either accidentally
or deliberately because of its beauty and
has now made itself at home all over the
tropics.
In Africa, it was first spotted in the
Nile Delta, then in the South African
province of Natal, and then in 1937 in
Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). It
began spreading across the continent in
earnest in the 1950s, jumping from lakes
to rivers,from dams to marshes,and from
ponds to irri g ation canals. But the
beautiful stranger is a killer.
It suffocates native plants, fish and
amphibious creatures by draining oxygen
from the wat e r. It hampers ri ve r
transport—and so trade and tourism—
and especially fishing when it gets tangled
M These earthworms produce enzymes 
that can be used in soap manufacture.
Mushrooms grown on agro-industrial 
waste can create jobs.P

in boat propellers and destroys nets with
its we i g h t . It threatens hy d r o - e l e c t ri c
power production by clogging up the
channels which feed the dams. Farming
suffers too because the fast-growing plant
blocks irrigation canals.
When all efforts to control it had
failed, ZERI decided to treat it as a
friend, as people do in Viet Nam where it
is cultivat e d , d ried and made into
compost which is excellent for growing
edible mushrooms. A kilo of such
compost can produce 112 kg of fresh
tropical oyster mushrooms (Pleurotus sajur
caju) in five weeks.
In Ethiopia, D awit A b at e , a
mycologist in the biology department at
Addis Ababa University, is training street
children to gr ow this simple and
profitable crop. In Zimbabwe, Margaret
Taguira, of the University of Africa at
Mutare, produces up to 100 kg a day.
Spore banks can now be set up, after the
Chinese example, to foster the scheme
which has turned a plague into a weapon
against poverty.
A worm that washes 
whiter
The colour white evokes thoughts of
purity and clean-smelling linen. But it
gets that way through treatment with
chlorine, which eats away at ozone. The
phosphates in detergents are also blamed
for killing off life in lakes and rivers and
causing green tides in the sea by setting
off excessive growth of plants, which then
decompose and empty the water of the
oxygen necessary for other things to grow.
Z.M. Nyiira, of Uganda’s National
Council for Science and Technology, in
Kampala, explains that some insects such
as termites produce enzymes that
“digest” cellulose and the blood and flesh
of living creatures; others include the
larvae of the bluebottle, the tsetse fly, the
mosquito and the earthworm. So why not
extract from some of the 1,800 known
varieties of earthworm, such as Eisenia
foetida, the enzymes they produce which
can easily remove blood, wine and earth
stains?
Such enzymes are already used to
p u rify medicines and va c c i n e s. N ow they
can be extracted from a wo rm with a
s y ringe without killing it; the only diffic u l t y
is distinguishing between the head and the
t a i l . Small soap firms in Colombia and
S l ovakia have started using this method.
The miracle of Las Gaviotas
The Las Gaviotas Env i r o n m e n t a l
Research Centre was set up in 1966 by
Paolo Lugari at V i c h a d a , in eastern
Colombia near the Venezuelan border.
Funded by the central mortgage bank, it has
built an intern ational reputation on its large-
scale use of renewable energy—equipping
40,000 units of low-cost housing in Bogota
with solar wat e r - h e at e rs and refri g e r at o rs ,
setting up semi-industrial kitchens fuelled
with cottonseed oil heated to 180°C in
vacuum tubes, so avoiding the use of
polluting fuels.
At Vichada,the hospital founded by Las
Gaviotas produces its own energy, distils its
own water, provides naturally-purified air,
cooks its own biologi c a l l y - gr ow n
vegetables and grows medicinal plants.
Colombia is losing 650,000 hectares of
trees each year, and Lugari has decided to
launch a huge reforestation programme.
Despite drought and extreme soil acidity,
about 1,000 hectares have been reforested
at the rate of one Caribbean pine planted
every few seconds around the clock for
three months. Resin extracted from the
pine is drained into boxes made of recycled
cardboard ingenious enough to have won a
national prize for innovation in packaging.
The return of the forest has meant
water has come back too. Filtered and
purified by the layer of humus, it is bottled
and sold cheaply as part of a treatment for
the digestive ailments which affect the
population. The fifth world congress of
ZERI will be held at Vichada this October.
A brewery for breeding fish
At Tsumeb, in northern Namibia, the
national brewery company makes sorghum
beer without leaving any waste. Inspired by
a pilot project in Fiji, the brewers also
breed fish and gr ow mushrooms. T h e
sorghum waste is put in concrete
containers where it ferments and gives off
methane gas. Eighty per cent of Tsumeb’s
inhabitants cook with this gas, t h u s
avoiding the use of wood fuel.
Namibia is one of the driest countries
in the world, and it takes five litres of water
to make a litre of beer. Instead of going to
waste, the water from the brewery is used
to fill big ponds. Seven tonnes of grain are
needed to produce a tonne of butcher’s
meat, but only 1.8 tonnes are needed to
produce a tonne of fish.So George Chan, a
M a u ritian expert who has wo r k e d
e x t e n s i vely in China, got the idea of
breeding fish near breweries and has had
excellent results. Grain also makes a very
good bedding in which to gr ow
mushrooms. Similar experiments are being
c a rried out in North A m e ri c a , Ja p a n ,
G e rm a ny, B r a z i l , Colombia and the
Seychelles. n
France Bequette
