The most recent meeting of the G8 group 
(the world’s eight leading industrial powers)
decided for the first time that globalization
needed to be “humanized”. Does that mean
it’s inhuman right now?
It’s very human and very creative in
the eyes of the strong and very inhuman
for the weak. It creates unprecedented
polarization.
A third of the world’s population has
substantially raised its standard of living
and expanded its cultural and technologi-
cal resources.The other side of the coin is
that the latest UNDP Human Development
Report showed a massive growth in both
inequality and poverty as well as social
exclusion and marginalization all over the
world,with a few big exceptions including
India, China and Chile.
Forty per cent of the planet’s popula-
tion lives in misery on less than two dol-
lars a day. Within this category, a growing
number live in extreme poverty, especial-
ly cultural poverty. No one in this plight
can make any use of the emerging infor-
mation society. So “humanizing” globali-
zation means harnessing all the enormous
creative might of the new technologies, of
new economic productivities and of
worldwide communication through the
Internet so that it benefits people outside
the most advanced, educated and sophis-
ticated sectors of the most powerful coun-
tries. But for the moment, this is just a
pipe dream. We’re told we have to do
things differently, but the effects of such
discrimination are still not being correc-
ted. In fact quite the opposite is happe-
ning.
Does this discrimination match the divide
between so-called “generic labour” and “self-
programmable labour”?
Not entirely. S e l f - p r o gr a m m a b l e
labour has enough information, educa-
tion and culture to adapt to constantly
changing technological and professional
conditions. But in a system which has
become purely based on the individual,
without any social safety net or solidarity,
belonging to this category doesn’t mean
you’re invulnerable: if a major incident
occurs, such as a physical or psychologi-
cal illness or a family crisis, you find your-
self on the other side of the fence. Many
middle-class children, for example, start
taking drugs between the age of 18 and
20 and end up in prison, thus heading
right down the path to social exclusion.
Generic labour refers to workers who,
because they don’t have a specific qualifi-
cation and an adequate level of education
and culture, cannot fit into the predomi-
nant system of production—machines
can or could replace them. Within this
category, there are two groups. There are
those who are still relatively protected,
who keep their jobs because they work in
institutions or live in countries that help
and protect them, and guarantee a decent
standard of living. There are also those
who live either in run-down city suburbs
in rich countries or in poverty-stricken



M A NUEL CAS T EL L S :
T HE CI T IZ EN VERSUS
T HE MACHINE
As the technological revolution revolutionizes economic life and communications and shakes 
industrial society to its foundations, a noted Spanish sociologist asks where the citizen stands 
in the emerging ‘information society’
regions and nations without the infra-
structure or companies that make pos-
sible and guarantee a transition towards
the information society. Such people are
totally excluded. That social exclusion
comes from lack of work.
Why do you say capitalism is much more
brutal today than it was in the past?
Because it’s broken the social
contract.These days, networks mean you
can connect everything that carries value
for this dominant system, thus making
those connected to it extremely dynamic.
But this structure also means that any-
thing for which it has little regard—indi-
viduals, regions, sectors and companies—
d o n ’t get connected and are thereby
condemned.And since it manages to take
control of anything which could be of
value to it, capitalism can afford to be
extremely choosy and to impose its own
rules.This is helped by the fact that states
and institutions, political or para-politi-
c a l , which acted as a counterwe i g h t
during the Industrial Revolution, have
very little influence over worldwide com-
munications, capital movements, techno-
l o gical development and production.
Might is right, a purely Darwinian logic .
Is anyone exempt from this logic?
In a way, it takes root independently of
a company ’s will and those who resist are
c rushed by competition because the net-
works consist only of the strong. And it
takes root inside the firms themselve s ,
independent of managers or outside share-
h o l d e rs. Look at advanced capitalism in
Silicon Valley which, i n c i d e n t a l l y, e m b o-
dies in a sense the 1960s Marxist ideal of
wo r k e rs ’ m a n a g e m e n t . The people who
work in Silicon Valley are paid to a large
extent in shares rather than a regular sala-
The people who work in
Silicon Valley are paid to a
large extent in shares ra t h e r
than a regular salary. So it’s in
their interest to push their way
upward in the firm, even if it
means kicking a colleague out
of a job on the grounds that he
or she isn’t productive enough.

ry. So it’s in their interest to push their way
up in the firm , e ven if it means kicking a
colleague out of a job on the grounds that
he or she isn’t productive enough.
Does this illustrate a trend which you
emphasize, namely the extraordinary
individualization of people’s destinies?
Setting aside current myths about the
impact of the new techno-economic sys-
tem on jobs, usually measured in terms of
falling unemployment, the fundamental
change lies in the greater flexibility of
labour relations.The way companies ope-
r ate in networks—both internal and
external—is destroying the notion of a
stable, reliable job which dates from the
Industrial Revolution.
In Bri t a i n , the birthplace of that revo-
l u t i o n , 55 per cent of the workforce is
i nvo l ved in va rious kinds of temporary,
p a rt-time or freelance wo r k . The traditio-
nal model of organized labour is no longer
the ru l e . The same thing is happening in
cities in poor countri e s , which are beco-
ming more and more urbanized.There the
so-called informal economy holds sway
and labour relations revo l ve round the
l o n g - t e rm lack of stable and regular wo r k .
Economic activity in such countries can be
quite pri m i t i ve but some of it is ve ry
a d va n c e d .
Whether we like it or not, job fle x i b i l i-
CAS T ELLS ON THE
UNI T ED NAT IONS
I think international organizations like UNESCO
have a really important part to play. They can
be a link between governments which are still,
after all, political instruments, and demands based
on people’s ideals, especially in the fields of deve-
lopment and peace.
So they must be meeting-places but, increa-
singly, also forums which give rise to pra c t i ca l
projects. For example, everyone agrees educa t i o n
is the key to reducing inequality and exclusion. But
what exactly does education mean? What must be
done on a world scale so the kind of education
needed reaches the two-thirds of humanity who
currently have no access to it? The response must
indeed come from governments. But UNESCO is
the very kind of organization within which a world
education strategy can be drawn up.
Bodies like the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank or the G8 group of countries are
managing systems of worldwide exchanges but
they concentrate on technological innovation,
economic productivity and growth of informa-
tion. Their power must be balanced by interna-
tional organizations like UNES CO , the World Health
Organization and the International Labour Orga-
nisation, which could draw up a new world social
and cultural contract, as the other bodies did for
economics and technology. But they will only
succeed in this if they acquire similar legitimacy
and authority by using the might of the netw o r k s .
n
ty is so much more efficient than previous
a rrangements that firms which still opera-
te with a mainly salaried workforce and
stable and established working methods
are doomed to failure by the laws of com-
p e t i t i o n . F i rms are also relying more and
more on a core of skilled wo r k e rs they
want to keep (and to whom they gi ve
stable jobs) and on a huge mass of tempo-
r a ry and sub-contracted wo r k e rs.W h at we
h ave is an individualization of the relat i o n-
ship between salaried wo r k e rs and firm s
on one side and among self-employed wo r-
k e rs on the other. E ve rybody sub-
contracts with eve rybody else.
But this trend introduces a totally unequal
balance of power between workers and
companies. . . .
Yes, but also between workers them-
selves. The strongest have real bargaining
power in the market, depending on what
they can contribute to their own or any
other firm.The unskilled don’t have such
power or any real power of collective bar-
gaining through trade unions. In the now-
dominant pri vate sector, unions these
days have only a meagre role and union
membership is steadily falling.This is why
we must resist shrinking the social securi-
ty safety-net and support a transition
from protecting individuals who wo r k
(the situation in most countries) to pro-
tecting people whether they work or not.
You paint a very gloomy picture. . . .
Saying that these changes only lead to
social exclusion isn’t the whole story.
They are extremely useful for very many
people—the worldwide image- and opi-
nion-makers. This is not a small elite or
oligarchy, since between 30 and 40 per
cent of the population in countries like
the United States and France belong to it.
They’ve gained huge opportunities not
The way companies operate in
n e tworks—both internal and
external—is destroying the
notion of a stable, reliable job
which dates from the Industrial
R e v o l u t i o n

identity which it called citizenship. And it
protected its citizens. But globalization
means the state can no longer guarantee
such protection or provide the meaning
necessary to foster citizenship.
Two reactions are possible to the buil-
ding of an inform ation society which
gives pride of place to competition. For
the strongest, those with money and
power, competition can give purpose to
their lives if they develop a totally indivi-
dualistic, even narcissistic and consume-
rist identity, becoming big earners and big
spenders. All networked societies are basi-
cally individualistic. It’s the liberal and
libertarian ideology of the dominant tech-
nical and economic elite.
But all around them, a whole mass of
people either lack the resources to
connect to this individualism or else reject
it. They give meaning to their lives by
building community identities. T h e y
build them on cultural practices which
express simple, sturdy values, such as
God, country, ethnic identity, land and
family. This makes them feel protected in
some way against the worldwide changes
over which they have lost all control.
But these identities are ambivalent. . . .
They can be open because they’re
engaged in dialogue with people who have
other identities. But they can be dogmatic
when expressed in a rigid, inward-looking
way which shuts out all other identities.
That’s the crux of the problem: everybo-
dy can’t be Argentine or Serb, Catholic or
Muslim, female or homosexual, so the
strong affirmation of a unique identity as
only for economic but also social, intel-
lectual and cultural creativity. As well as
generating social exclusion, the technolo-
gical revolution has creative and libera-
ting aspects that we should not ignore.
Such as?
The Internet has reduced the power
of governments and the big media mono-
polies to control people. One result is
more openness, especially where political
corruption is concerned. The powerful
are used to spying on ordinary citizens,
but now citizens can spy on the powerful.
Work can be more independent and pro-
fessional advancement more varied. We
don’t have to stay stuck for life in the
same bu r e a u c r a cy and only adva n c e
through seniority.The educational level of
women is rising to an extraordinary
extent (most university graduates in the
U.S. are now women, for example).Their
professional advance is continuing.
D i s c ri m i n ation is still there, but it’s
dwindling. It’s better than being shut
away at home.
One of the main points of your work 
is that the information society seems 
to harbour the seeds of opposition to itself. 
How is that?
The process is very complex. The
modern state—whether liberal, socialist
or Marxist—has been built on a denial of
basic and historical identities. The state
made the nat i o n , not the other way
round. But it also managed to fuse these
original identities into a new abstract



A MONUMEN TA L W ORK
The publication of Manuel Castells’ monumental
trilogy about information technology and the
global economy, The Information Age: Economy,
So c i e ty and Culture ,1 a t t racted wide attention and
superlatives from reviewers impressed by the eru-
dition and breadth of this “encyclopaedic work”.
Castells’ aims might indeed seem grandiose. He
says he wants to “understand our world”—all of it—to
t ry to “give meaning to what appears to us today as
terrible chaos.” In the last quarter of a century, he says,
“a technological revolution—information technology —
has transformed our ways of thinking, consuming,
buying and selling, running businesses, communi-
cating, living, dying, making war and making love.”
He explains why and how these processes have
come about in three volumes of over 300 pages
each, the result of 12 years’ interdisciplinary
research which took him all over the world. He
says the structure of industrial society—its econo-
mies, political units, industrial complexes and cul-
t u ral identities—always revolved round centra l
points but that these are now disappearing. In
what he calls the “informational society,” a system
of networks develops in every sector. “The power
of flows overwhelms the flows of power,” he says.
Such iconoclasm is the product of an unusual
intellectual journey. In 1962, the 20-year-old Cas-
tells, “a shade Marxist but not Leninist” and to a far
greater extent “anarchist and libertarian”, left his
native Spain to study in France. He was expelled
from France in May 1968 but returned two years
later.
By chance, he gravitated towards urban socio-
l o gy and became one of its leading exponents. His
La Question urbaine ( 1972) was translated into 10
languages, and The City and the Gra s s ro o t s won the
C. Wright Mills Prize in 1983 for the best social
science book published in the United States. To d a y
he is professor of sociology and city and regional
planning at the Center for Western European Stu-
dies at the University of California at Berkeley.
A friendly and persuasive man, with an impish
sense of irony, Castells refuses to act the guru and
points out that his work has limits. “Every time an
intellectual has tried to answer the question ‘what
should we do?’ it’s led to disaster,” he says. n
1. The 3 volumes, published by Blackwell, Oxford, UK,
are: The Rise of the Network Society (1996), The Power of
Identity (1997) and End of Millennium (1998).
This photo and photo on facing page feature in a report by Swedish photographer Lars Tunbjork 
on the dehumanization of the office environment.

the only way to give meaning to one’s life
leads to fragmentation into tribes, to a
sort of collective atomization.
The only answer to this major threat is
to build bridges between these very diffe-
rent identities.The main challenge for the
state is to establish not only a political
contract between citizens but a cultural
contract so that all these cultural codes
and multiple identities can communicate
with each other. Only with such a
contract can a state guarantee the coexis-
tence of these identities while recognizing
their individual expression. But in view of
the state’s historical mode of construc-
tion, it is ill equipped to do this.
In view of this dual threat of exclusion and
fragmentation, how can a shared awareness
develop and lead to global political action?
This is the key question and I don’t
have an answer. I’ve based my work on
observation, which isn’t forecasting.What
I see is a lot of resistance to the grip of the
network system. Some of these networks
no longer obey any human logic whatsoe-
ver: they have become what I would des-
cribe as automata.
The best example is the world finan-
cial market. It controls everything and no
one controls it, not even governments.
First, it pools together money from all
kinds of ori gi n s , not just fin a n c i e rs ’
money but everyone’s, including our own
(in the form of savings or pension funds).
Computer programmes and electrical cir-
cuits then keep it constantly mov i n g
around. Finally, and above all, it obeys
rules which are only partly economic,
because what I call information turbulen-
ce plays a crucial part. Various players,
including political players, send messages
and create images which lead a multitude
of other players to react in the financial
market. But they don’t act in concert and
no one can say for sure how the market
will react. M a ny playe rs , some more
powerful than others, can thus influence
the world in which these financial tran-
sactions take place.They can follow stra-
tegies, but nobody can control the process
or the outcome of the game. An automa-
ton has been created.
So what happens to politics?
Today politics are not defined by the
media but within media space, which is
occupied by the countless and ever more
varied television stations and, increasin-
gly, the Internet.So what comes into poli-
tical existence—in other words what
forms into a political opinion in people’s
minds—depends solely on what appears
in the media. Traditional political stake-
holders are adapting to this new media
context. But they don’t play leading roles
in it at all.They’ve been joined by a mass
of lobbies, interest groups and professio-
nal organizations which specialize in crea-
ting and manipulating messages and
images.These groups create new inform a-
tion turbu l e n c e , which stems from their
d e t e rmined strat e gies and how indepen-
All netw o r ked societies 
are basically individualistic. 
It’s the liberal and liberta r i a n
i d e o l o gy of the dominant
t e c h n i cal and economic elite.


dent the media are. But the final political
result—the impact on decisions citizens
take—has no relation to the wishes of each
of the playe rs. I t ’s the “ a u t o m at i c ” result of
interactions that nobody can control.
How do people react to this “automatism”?
I’ve noticed they do two things. First,
they vote to express their opposition.The
main changes brought about by elec-
tions—caused by shifts of mood among
only 5-10 per cent of voters—are the
result of opposition to a past event or
decision, not of support for a future poli-
cy. Such protest votes show that citizens
feel on the defensive towards the political
system. Secondly, they rate the system’s
players right at the bottom of the league
table of what they respect in society.They
think they’re corrupt, expensive and inef-
ficient.As a result, more and more people
are ceasing to see politics as a way of
changing their lives.
What about those who do want to change
things? 
Our generation has been conv i n c e d
t h at the state is the main instrument for
applying a political programme which
meets the expectations and needs of civil
s o c i e t y. But what can the state do today
faced with the financial machine and the
media machine? It has extremely limited
room for manoeuvre. People who want to
change things or do more in life than just
e a rn money are developing a new way of
conducting politics, this time without any
m e d i ation from the stat e . They have come
to act politically by taking pragmatic ethi-
cal action, working to bring about real
change in a small geographical area, at a
s p e c i fic time or in a limited fie l d . Of cour-
se such an approach only brings about ve ry
small changes in comparison with all the
changes that are necessary, but at least it’s
e f f e c t i ve . I t ’s a practical policy designed to
b ring immediate results. S u c c e s s f u l
examples of this approach include NGOs
like Doctors of the World and the Jubilee
2000 move m e n t , which has achieved sub-
stantial results in its campaign to alleviat e
the debt burden on the poorest countri e s.
Can such a piecemeal policy make a dent in
this big issue?
My bet is that all these piecemeal and
isolated activities,which involve hundreds
of thousands of people, will gradually
come together to form networks. I hope
the growth of networks will eventually
include those which want to fight the
harmful effects of other networks. That
alongside the networks of money, techno-
logy and information, alternative but just
as powerful (and so just as efficient) net-
works will develop and convey alternative
values that will steadily build new global
political strategies.
But some fundamental trends are
emerging even before we reach this final
stage. Look at the women’s movement. It
managed to set off the biggest cultural
r e volution in human history without
using traditional political means.
However, the changes in cultural prac-
tices and codes, first inside wo m e n ’s
minds, were so far-reaching that they’ve
now been incorporated into political sys-
tems, at least where those systems are
dynamic and democratic. n
Interview by René Lefort
Director of the UNESCO Courier
