GABRIEL DVOSKIN
ARGENTINE JOURNALIST



Teaching free Ti m o r
Money may be tight, but East Timor’s school year began recently with plenty of enthusiasm. One of the
people in charge discusses what lies in store
14 The UNESCO Courier - November 2000
school year without teachers, schools or
universities—just pupils. This is the chal-
lenge facing Armeido Maya, the former
rector of the University of Timor who is
now running the country’s higher educa-
tion system. “If we could manage while
occupied by Indonesia, just think what we
can do now that we’re free,” he declares.
M a y a , 4 2 , was born in East Ti m o r
under Portuguese rule. In 1975,only two
weeks after gaining independence from
Po r t u g a l , the country was occupied by
Indonesia.“I had to give up my plans to
enter the Jesuit school in Dili [the
c a p i t a l ] ,”he says.“I was 18 and very keen
to learn, but for two and a half years I
chose to live in the jungle and the bush
with my mother and two brothers as a
member of the underground resistance.”
When he left the Fr e t i l í n g u e r r i l l a s
and came back to Dili,he was tortured by
the occupation forces. After agonizing
about what to do with his life,he gave up
the idea of becoming a priest though not
his faith in East Ti m o r ’s independence.
To d a y, the problems are different.
“ N i n e t y - five percent of school buildings
were destroyed by the Indonesians a little
over a year ago after the referendum that
c o n firmed our wish for independence,”
he says. Rebuilding a poor country is
t o u g h .“ The help of the Catholic church
has been very important,”says Maya,w h o
spent five years at the Catholic University
in Java reading history and geography.
The East Timorese are 90 percent Catholic,
and identify closely with a church that was
on their side during the bloody 24-year
Indonesian occupation, in which 300,000
people were killed. As a result, the 1996
Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to A r c h-
bishop Carlos Ximenes Belo and the poli-
tical leader José Ramos Horta.
Starting from scratch:
from language to history
“ The education system needs fir s t
a i d ,” says Maya.“ To begin with, we want
to teach computing,human rights,E n g l i s h
and Po r t u g u e s e.This is what we need for
training and informal education.” Th e
language problem in East Timor is espe-
cially serious since almost everyone
speaks the Bahasa of the Indonesian inva-
d e r s, while the local Tetun language has a
surprising number of dialects.“Bahasa is
going to be replaced by Tetun and Por-
tuguese in primary and secondary schools,
and by Portuguese and English in higher
education,” he says.
Language classes, however, are jeo-
pardized by some very basic flaws. “We
could only begin the school year when
classrooms had roofs and enough books
and other materials,”says Maya,who also
points to a lack of good teachers.“Half of
East Timorese children study in a roofless school destroyed by anti-independence militia in Dili.

those who say they can teach primary
and secondary courses would fail profes-
sional tests.”
Things are not much better in the uni-
v e r s i t y.“ We have 5,000 people wanting to
take courses in agronomy, e d u c a t i o n ,e c o-
nomics or political science, which are our
four faculties, but we only have 1,000
places because 3,000 are already reserved
for those whose studies were interrupted
last year. Furthermore, we only have 90
teachers for the four faculties.”
The curriculum has also caused a
number of headaches.“ We have to teach
children the history of our country,but we
need to do it with a book that is impartial
and based on democratic values,” h e
observes.“We’re working on a textbook
with help from foreign teachers, w h i c h
will have to be ready
within a year.” Th e n
it will be read under
tin roofs, in class-
rooms with dirt flo o r s,
in buildings nobody
ever thought would
become places of
l e a r n i n g. The Je s u i t
Jacob Filomeno, who
runs the refugee
o f f i c e, simply notes
that “every day we
have 2,000 children
gathered outside wanting to take classes.”
UNICEF sent $490,000 worth of
school supplies to East Timor, mainly in
the form of $300 kits designed by
UNESCO “that were a success in Somalia
and Rwanda” according to Pilar A g u i l a r,
the UNICEF representative in East
Timor.“Each kit contains enough mate-
rials for 80 pupils and a teacher in a class
that can be held outdoors.”
Coping with a desperate situation does
not faze Maya, whose only complaint is
that he does not have time to play chess
and to read. Outside his offic e, the alleys
and streets are full of pigs, chickens and
oxen while helicopters skim through the
sky to anxious glances from people below.
“Between 1993 and 1997,after retur-
ning from further studies in sociology
and economics in New Zealand,I was in
charge of the University of Dili again
and the situation was worse,” r e c a l l s
M a y a .“I don’t mean in terms of poverty,
but in terms of freedom. The tyres of my
car were slashed several times,I got death
threats by phone. I had to go into exile in
the United States, to Minnesota.There I
w a s,a man from the tropics,used to tem-
peratures of more than 30° C, passing the
time in some place where I remember
being frightened by snow!”Maya had to
go into exile several times due to political
fluctuations in East Timor, but his firm
intention was always to return.
But going home after the fall of
former Indonesian dictator Suharto was
no easy matter.“After the independence
referendum on August 30th of last year,
we had to hide in the mountains again,”
he says.“I didn’t even have time to enjoy
my honeymoon. But now I’m back,and
this time for good.” Maya hopes many
other students and ex-students share his
desire to return.“Most who went to New
Zealand and Australia to study will come
back. I’m sure of that. We need them to
build the country. Their skills are vital
for our people and the thousands of chil-
dren who have to go to school.”
For the moment,
life is still confused
and unstable.Wi t n e s s
the jumbled state of
East Ti m o r ’s small
s o c i e t y : in market-
p l a c e s, several lan-
guages are mirrored
by three currencies—
the U.S. dollar, which
has been adopted 
as the official cur-
r e n cy, the Indonesian
rupiah and the Au s-
tralian dollar, both local currencies  from
neighbouring states.“Over the next year,
w e ’ll have elections and a local Ti m o r e s e
government will take over from the coun-
t r y ’s Brazilian administrator, Sergio Vi e i r a
de Mello,” says Maya.
The present administration is a coali-
tion that includes members of the
National Council of Timorese Resistance
( C N RT ) , such as Maya, who also works in
the education ministry,and officials from
the United Nations Transitional A d m i-
nistration in East Timor (UNTA E T ) .
“We’re working against the clock,” says
M a y a .“As well as the help from UNICEF,
w e ’ve also had $13 million from the Wo r l d
Bank that we’ve used for the most urgent
repair work and to provide some trai-
ning for teachers and pay their wages.”
“Wages,” it should be said, is some-
thing of a euphemism. Maya is ready to
tackle all the problems that come his way,
including hunger. He prefers not to talk
about it, but UNICEF is also taking care
of the most urgent food needs of pupils
and teachers, some of whom are going
to school on empty stomachs and are so
tired that they cannot concentrate for
long. “But at least we’re free now,” says
Maya with a smile. ■
