Technology as l i b e ra t o r
◗ John Ko h u t
The technological revolution is helping to give voice to the voiceless
◗ Editor in Chief of the UN E S C O
C o u r i e r
Over the past two decades, there has been an
explosion of media offerings,from the pro-
liferation of magazine titles, to the hun-
dreds of cable television stations now available
even in some poorer nations, and the never-
ending expansion of the Internet.
Underpinning this are advances in technology
that have drastically reduced the costs of media
production and distribution, making it possible
for those without huge funds to launch their own
ventures or simply to make their voices heard.
Some of the most notewo rt hy technologi c a l
breakthroughs include: digital layout of newspa-
pers, replacing time-consuming and expensive
typesetting; desktop publishing via the personal
computer; increasing simplification of broadcast
equipment; and, of course, the Internet.
Among the more renowned beneficiaries of
this technological transformation has been the
Independent newspaper of the UK, which shook
the media establishment when it was set up in the
late 1980s. Digital layout and transmission to
printers around the country cut production and
d i s t ri bution costs, helping make the ve n t u r e
financially possible.
Since then, t e c h n o l o gical progress has
enabled smaller and smaller players to set up their
own media outlets. In televison,one can now pro-
duce programmes with easy-to-handle digi t a l
video cameras costing as little as $1,000 each.
Time required for programme editing has been
radically slashed, saving on labour as well as other
costs.
Not only is it much cheaper to launch a media
venture today, it’s also a lot simpler. Twenty years
ago, jobs including handling even elementary
radio transmitters, newspaper page layout, and
television programme editing were reserved for
specialists who trained and honed their skills over
several years. Today, a few weeks or even days are
sufficient to acquire the basic skills to accomplish
more or less the same tasks.
The biggest technological leap in media over
the past century has permitted just about anyone
to launch a media enterprise.With the Internet,
“the costs of entry are nothing,” says Brian
Trench, senior lecturer in communications at the
Dublin City University.
All of this has had profound social implica-
tions, challenging the concentration of power in
the media.“The traditional centres of control are
withering away,” says Dr. Anura Goonasekera,
Head of Research at the Asian Media
I n f o rm ation and Communciation Centre in
Singapore. “Mass communication under the pre-
vious modes of production, both capitalist and
socialist,used to be controlled by a group of func-
tionaries. . . . [But now] such direct controls
through ow n e rship are becoming increasingly
difficult.”
To some extent the developing world is rea-
ping the fruits of the technological break-
throughs. But much more needs to be done if
poorer countries are to benefit as much as the
West from the diversity and democracy, not to
mention more jobs and vibrant economies, pos-
sible through new media.
“With the help of new information technolo-
gies, numerous opportunities exist for indepen-
dent media to cut their production costs, add
value to their product, expand their markets and
consolidate their independence,” writes Professor
Guy Berger of the Journalism Department at
Rhodes University in South Africa.
A number of analysts question whether the
technological revolution will in the long term turn
out to be a force of diversification. For instance,if
s t a rt-up costs are miniscule, marketing for
I n t e rnet services can often be enorm o u s l y
expensive in order to win the attention of consu-
mers swamped with choice. University of Illinois
professor Robert McChesney argues in R i c h
Media, Poor Democracy that the major media com-
panies will dominate the Internet because they
already have big newsrooms, war chests and
brand recognition.
But on balance, the new technology appears
to be a force of diversity and, by extension,demo-
cracy. Andrew Shapiro, senior adviser at the
Markle Foundation, in a a book entitled The
Control of Change, cites the example of Radio B92
in Belgr a d e . When Yu g o s l av leader Slobodan
Milosevic shut the station down in late 1996, B92
simply went online on the Internet. ■
‘ With the help of new
information technologies,
n u m e rous opportunities exist 
for independent media to cut
their production costs, add value
to their pro d u c t , expand 
their markets and consolidate
their independence’
