“Internet! Internet!” A street urchin
rushes towards a journalist who has
just arri ved in T i m buktu (Mali).
“Look what a French reporter gave me,”
he boasts in front of his chums, showing
an e-mail address scrawled on a little
notepad. “I’m going to the MCT1 this
afternoon to write to him.”
Since its MCT (Multipurp o s e
Community Telecentre) opened in May
1998,Timbuktu (30,000 inhabitants) has
felt less of a prisoner of the Sahara desert.
Along with traditional local hangouts,
where the menfolk gather in the evenings
to gossip, the MCT has become the tren-
diest place in town.
Men in traditional dress, women and
inquisitive youngsters regularly crowd in
the doorway of the temporary premises in
an annex of the town hall.“They all come
to look,” says Birama Diallo, the centre’s
energetic coordinator, with a laugh.
Electronic advice
Like most people in Timbuktu, the
mayor,Ibrahim Mohamed,sees the MCT
first as a source of the kind of knowledge
needed to revive the region’s stagnant
social and economic life.The most encou-
r a ging MCT-based projects are being
drawn up in the fields of medicine, tea-
ching, the media, culture, agriculture and
tourism.
“A group of doctors has been trained
to look for information on the Web,” says
Canadian France Henri , a UN E S C O
consultant. “They’ve already found some
terrific pages about gynaecological pro-
blems. They printed them out, photoco-
pied them and handed them out at the
hospital.They’d also like to be able to get
‘electronic advice’ from their colleagues
in Bamako [Mali’s capital] and elsewhe-
re.”
“The most urgent thing for us is to
find out about other people’s expe-
riences,” adds a teacher. “Some countries
have the same problems as we do, for
e x a m p l e , in getting girls enrolled in
school.2 We’d like to know what solutions
they’ve found.” He suggests material from
the Internet could be used to produce
some good school textbooks, which are
few and far between.
The Net could also be useful to the
four local radio stations, says Diallo. “For
example, they could use it to find out how
to make best use of the new varieties of
floating rice that were recently introduced
into the region and put that information
out in their farming programmes.”
The regional director for cultural
affairs wants to commission the MCT to
create some web pages about the history
and heritage of Timbuktu. The tourist
sector, still in its infancy, wants to do the
same kind of thing to attract visitors.
Through its website,not yet complete,the
MCT presents an attractive view of “the
town of 333 saints.”
The townspeople do not want to be
just consumers of ideas and pictures, says
Diallo. “They’re also very keen to make
themselves known.” He recalls that in the
Middle Ages, “Holy Timbuktu” was a
beacon throughout West Africa and the
Islamic wo r l d . It had 180 madrasahs
(Koranic schools) and the renow n e d
Sankore University, which was attended
by up to 25,000 students. The mosques
and tens of thousands of ancient manus-
cripts, preserved by families and by the
Ahmed Baba cultural centre,are evidence
of this intense intellectual activity.
But beyond this mat e rial heri t a g e ,
Timbuktu is banking on its intangible
attraction as a place to escape from the
world, on the aura of the unknown and
the inaccessible that it conjures up in
Western minds. “Our asset is our name,”
s ays Mayor Mohamed. “The wo r d
Timbuktu says something to everybody,
even people who don’t know where Mali
is,” adds Culture and Tourism Minister
Aminata Traoré. “These days, people in
the West have a great urge to get away
T IMBUKTU ONL INE
◗ Sophie Boukhari
A historic city on the edge of the Sahara is banking on an Internet connection 
to revitalize its economic life 
◗ UNESCO Courier journalist
1.The French term, which is actually used in
Timbuktu,is TCP = Télécentre Communautaire
Polyvalent. 2 The proportion of girls attending school in Mali
is very low (41 per cent) and particularly low in
the Timbuktu area (23.7 per cent).
Timbuktu’s telecentre has attracted more than 2,000 visitors since it was opened in May 1998.

from it all.Timbuktu hasn’t got much to
sell, but it can sell dreams.”
The way the MCT works is simple.To
raise money for community deve l o p m e n t
p r o j e c t s , it sells a range of serv i c e s , such as
t e l e c o m m u n i c ations (public phones, fa x ,
e-mail and Internet access), the produc-
tion of databases and web pages, d i gi t i z i n g
text and wo r d - p r o c e s s i n g . It charges less
than a dollar (U.S.) to send an e-mail and
$2.50 to surf the Web for an hour.
The centre also runs courses, inclu-
ding an introduction to the Internet and
new technologies, how to find informa-
tion online, and library science.“Students
and other people come to us because uni-
versities in Mali don’t offer proper com-
puter training,” says Diallo. “If they want
to get a job in Bamako, they have to know
something about computers.”
In a country with fewer than 2,000
people connected to the Internet among a
population of more than 10 million, the
MCT is the only “decentralized” server
and the only one that is publicly owned.
The five others are private and based in
Bamako. For the moment, MCT’s capaci-
ty only allows 20 subscribers (so far, 17
have signed up, at a monthly fee of $28).
“The quality of the phone line to the
Internet connection node in Bamako is
also poor,” says Diallo. “If 30 people go
online at the same time then the line is
saturated,” admits Zourkoufili Maïga, the
regional director of the state telecommu-
nications company, Sotelma. “And since
the telephone arrived in rural areas in
1999, this has often happened.”
Diallo is waiting impatiently for the
arrival of a VSAT (Very Small Aperture
Terminal), promised by the International
Telecommunication Union, to improve
the situation.The VSAT, a small satellite
antenna, will mean the MCT will no lon-
ger need to use terrestrial phone lines.
The centre cost about $850,000 to set
up, half of which was provided by inter-
national funding agencies.3 It employs six
people and has 11 computers, but will get
several dozen more machines when it
moves into permanent premises, which
are near completion and being paid for by
the townspeople. To raise the $50,000
start-up costs, the town authorities have
staged a number of events, including a
gala of the T i m buktu Residents and
Friends Association and a cultural week,
and also appealed to local people to
contribute. In 1999, an airport tax for
tourists was introduced, with all the pro-
ceeds going to help pay for the building
work.
Despite technical problems, the MCT
seems to have impressed the tow n s-
people. “Since it opened, people have
started buying computers,” says Diallo.
So fa r , about 2,000 have visited the
c e n t r e , and members of professional
organizations and NGOs, tourists, guides,
librarians,secretaries,students and others
have come looking for information or to
buy one of the services on offer.
But the future is not yet secure. If the
centre is to survive, it will have to be self-
financing by 2001, when outside funding
ends. Financial independence is especial-
ly important because the main national
body behind the project,Sotelma,is being
privatized.
“ We can make it if we have 200
I n t e rnet subscri b e rs ,” s ays Diallo.This is a
lot for the nort h e rn region of the country,
which has only 570 telephone subscri b e rs
(400 in T i m buktu and 170 in rural areas)
and an illiteracy rate of over 80 per cent.
But Diallo is counting on better quality
s e rv i c e , especially when the V S AT arri ve s ,
to win customers outside the regi o n .
From the Sahara
to cyberspace
“The private Internet providers are
complaining about unfair competition,”
he admits, “but what are they doing to
develop their own services and to set up
cybercafés outside the capital?” He says
only a public service can take the first
steps to allow people in the countryside
access to cyberspace. It costs five to 10
times more to install a phone in a rural
area than in a town.
“ To safeguard the future of the MCT,
i t ’s not enough to ensure its commercial
s u c c e s s ,” s ays Henri , the UN E S C O c o n s u l-
t a n t .“The money earned must keep on fun-
ding community development projects.”
For these people on the sidelines of
the global village, the centre is not just a
fancy telecommunications shop. It gives
hope of a new world. “The Internet isn’t
a luxury of the rich,” says Mohamed.“On
the contrary, it’s really for the poor, who
have very little access to information.” On
the edge of the Sahara, books are few and
expensive, and half the population has
never seen television. ■
3 Mainly the International Development Research
Centre, the International Telecommunication
Union, UNESCO, the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Health Organization.
Timbuktu’s telecentre sells a range of telecommunications and word processing services.
