P r o fit and solidarity have stopped
giving each other the cold shoulder and
are becoming part n e rs explains Juan
Pina, a Spanish journalist who specializes
in the social economy. “We are heading
towards a set of ethics more attuned to
reality, in which profit stops being a kind
of necessary evil linked to greed,while the
public good stops being the exclusive res-
ponsibility of politicians.”
Alongside credit cards whose issuers
and users contribute a fixed amount of
money or a percentage of takings to
groups like the Red Cross, Greenpeace or
Amnesty Intern at i o n a l , a number of
“ethical banks” h ave set up shop in
Europe, Japan or Canada, and are measu-
■
The jobs and wages of millions of
people throughout the world depend
indirectly on a bell which at four
o’clock every afternoon marks the end of
trading on the Dow Jones, the index of
leading shares on the New York stock
exchange. Almost two billion dollars shift
each day from one continent to another at
staggering speed. Speculation can make
almost every currency tremble, and few
trading floors are shielded from an abrupt
slump in value. But people’s desire to live
in a better world is increasingly affecting a
commodity that,whether we like it or not,
determines our lives: money.
ring their profitability more in social
terms than by pure financial gain. The
basic message which these banks try to
spread is that, through no extra effort, the
small or large amounts of savings that
many people deposit each month in their
bank accounts can be used to further
their ideals. And that this can be done
without abandoning the guarantees offe-
red by traditional banking: s o l ve n cy,
interest, readily available cash and good
returns.
The slogans of some of these banks are
more than explicit: “The highest interest
is that of eve ry b o d y,” announces an
a d ve rtisement for the Italian Ethical
Bank. “Are you content to turn a blind



T HE BATTLE 
F OR AN ET HICAL BUCK
◗ Lucía Iglesias Kuntz
Ethical banks that include socially responsible investments in their bottom line are winning
support from people who share their ideals
◗ UNESCO Courier journalist
A fair trade boutique in Belfast: making sure producers get a fair end of the deal.

eye to the way your money is being used,
or are you ready to put your principles
into practice?” the UK Co-operat i ve
Bank asks its potential clients. “ T h e
Citizen’s Bank’s mechanism is value-dri-
ven, rather than by economic growth and
e f fic i e n cy,” declares a pamphlet from
Japan’s Citizen’s Bank.
Historical 
roots
The roots of modern ethical invest-
ment can be traced to the United States
in the 1920s. The Methodist Church,
which until then had regarded the stock
exchange as a shady gambling den, deci-
ded to start investing, but only on condi-
tion that it would not put money into the
liquor trade or get involved in the betting
industry. But social investment did not
come into its own until the 1970s.
During the Viet Nam War, groups of
citizens decided to boycott the firm that
made napalm gas, which had been
deployed in the Vietnamese jungle, cau-
sing terrible physical deformities in affec-
ted communities. From then on,
c h u r c h e s , f o u n d ations and unive rs i t i e s
s t a rted to ask themselves what their
money was being used for. Nowadays,
ethical considerations are found in a wide
spectrum of bank products: from “ethical
investment funds”, which look very close-
ly at the companies they buy shares from,
excluding those with unacceptable busi-
ness activities or a proper wage or social
p o l i cy ; to current accounts that offer
interest lower than the going market rate,
but promise to invest some of their profits
in development projects. Likewise, ethical
investment institutions come in all shapes
and sizes. Some work like normal banks,
with branches, cash machines and che-
quebooks. Others are more like mutual
funds or credit co-operatives, such as the
French NEF (Nouvelle Economie
Fraternelle), which since 1988 has been
lending funds solely to teaching, organic
farming and health projects.
In keeping with the Internet era, seve-
ral banks base themselves largely in
cy b e rs p a c e . One of them is Italy’s
Universal Ethical Bank, which opened its
doors for business in Padua just over a
year ago, and now has offices in Brescia,
Milan, Rome, Florence and Modena. Its
president, Fabio Salviato, speaks proudly
of having assembled in a short time funds
totalling $4.5 million used to finance 250
projects in Italy and abroad. “Our slogan
is defence of the poor. In the Third World,
of course, but also in Italy, where approxi-
mately seven million people live below the
poverty line,” says Salviato. His bank spe-
cializes in social investments made in four
a r e a s : the co-operat i ve sphere—funda-
mental in a country like Italy, which has
deciding which kind of development it
will be. I don’t accept that the only crite-
ria guiding investment policies should be
‘giving money to those who already have
money.’ I believe the right policy is to give
money to those who do good things, even
if the return is less. That’s why I’m a
member of an ethical bank.”
Ethical investment, Rinaldo adds,“is a
concrete response to criticism of our eco-
nomic system, which is centred on maxi-
mizing profit.This is the start of a revolu-
tion, a real revolution based on each one
of us, showing that it’s possible to build
an economy that is also based on values
such as the common good, conservation
of the environment, peace, respect for
marginalized people. In short, an econo-
more than 4,000 co-operatives,the volun-
tary sector, the environment and interna-
tional partnerships.
“Above all,” Salviato says, “we finance
NGOs with micro-credit projects in
Albania and Macedonia. In Guatemala,
we’ve helped set up a small community
bank in the town of Chajul, which pro-
duces coffee to sell to businesses which
agree to fair trading. The return we pay
on deposit accounts is the same as the
Italian rate of inflation, which oscillates
between two and 2.5 per cent, while the
interest we pay on current accounts is one
per cent, somewhat less than the going
market rate. But the account’s adminis-
tration costs are also lower than those in
conventional banks.” This is made pos-
sible in large part by the thousands of
volunteers from other non-profit organi-
zations who were behind the creation of
the Ethical Bank, and which have current
accounts and credit needs.
Two thousand registered groups and
10,000 people now have savings in the
Ethical Bank. E nvironmental engi n e e r
Loris Rinaldo is one of the bank’s custo-
mers. “I strongly believe that the econo-
my, much more than politics, is control-
ling world development,” Rinaldo says,
“and that banks have a crucial role in
my centred on people.”
Clearly not everybody is as keen as
Rinaldo. In an Internet discussion forum
on ethics and the economy initiated by
Canada’s Citizens Bank, there were seve-
ral comments along the lines of “congra-
tulations for your intelligent marketing
c a m p a i g n , but I’m not interested in
banks’ ethical opinions. I would prefer
them to concentrate on giving the client
better service at lower cost.”
Reconciling 
different views
It is also worth asking whether ethical
investment, which on one side owes its
existence to people’s aspiration to live in a
better world, might also become part of
an image campaign waged by traditional
banks desperate to capture this new and
socially conscious client base. G u y
Hooker, the director of Britain’s Ethical
I nvestment Co-operat i ve , b e l i e ves that
“people are choosing ethically sound
investments and ethically sound banks
because they have become collectively
conscious of the power of their money,
and because in many cases they get better
customer service.”
The idea of what is moral is obviously
not the same for eve ryo n e . Some of us
Each time members of Canada’s Citizens Bank use their credit card, the bank donates about 10 cents 
to Amnesty International or Oxfam.
‘I strongly believe 
that the economy, much more
than politics, is controlling
world development, and that
banks have a crucial role 
in deciding which kind 
of development it will be.’

might think it appalling that a bank fin a n c e s
businesses which deal in arm s , though they
would not think it so bad if the funds were
lent to tobacco companies or to political
p a rt i e s. L i k e w i s e , some might prefer to
finance literacy programmes rather than
s ave-the-whale campaigns or fair banana tra-
ding projects. With these discrepancies in
m i n d , a number of banks, including the Tri o-
dos Bank created in the Netherlands in 1980
with affil i ates in Belgium and Bri t a i n , o f f e r
their clients the option of directing their
i nvestment to specific areas, such as organic
fa rming or the development of solar energy
projects in countries of the South.
Bank spokesman Thomas Steiner
explains how his bank tries to reconcile dif-
ferent viewpoints: “Our offices in Belgi u m ,
the Netherlands and the United Kingdom
do not work like McDonald’s, which is
exactly the same in eve ry country. Our Bel-
gian partner has a certain Belgian flavo u r ,
and emphasizes social development projects;
in the United Kingdom we focus more on
helping charitable organizat i o n s ; and in the
Netherlands our main concern is the env i-
r o n m e n t .”
When the time comes to hand out
loans or choose companies that will recei-
ve funds, the Dutch bank applies very
strict standards. “Like any other bank, we
make loans. The criteria we use before
deciding whether to grant them are ‘posi-
tive’; anyone who asks us for money must
belong to one of the areas in which we
work: nature, the social economy, non-
profit organizations, culture and develop-
ment co-operation. We only lend money
to projects that comply with these positi-
ve criteria. On the other hand, we have
investment funds. We invest the money
that our clients entrust us with on the
stock exchange through criteria we call
‘negative’.We invest only in firms with no
links to nuclear energy, arms or tobacco.”
After 20 years of existence, Triodos has a
portfolio of 40,000 savers and 4,000 sha-
reholders.
The goal 
of transparency
Tr a n s p a r e n cy is a prized goal for ethical
b a n k s , including Switzerland’s Banque
A l t e rn at i ve Suisse (BAS), which in a
c o u n t ry where the law protects bank secrecy
annually publishes the names of people and
businesses that have received its loans as we l l
as details of the sums invo l ve d . C i t i z e n s
B a n k , owned by the Va n c o u ver City Sav i n g s
Credit Union, C a n a d a ’s largest credit union,
goes one step further. As part of its com-
munity donations programme, clients are
i nvited to suggest groups which they believe
deserve a share of a fund.The suggestions
are classified into four groups according to
the area in which they fa l l . Clients are then
i nvited to vote on which groups should
r e c e i ve 50 per cent of the fund, 25 per cent,
15 per cent and 10 per cent,and funds are
a l l o c ated according to the results of the
p o l l . In 1999, for instance, clients voted to
donate $17,700 to the Canadian Catholic
Organization for Development and Peace,
which fights against pove rty and injustice in
the world through its partner groups in 50
countries. Second place went to Frontier
College, a group of university volunteers
a c t i ve in literacy progr a m m e s , w h i c h
received $9,000.“This procedure involves
an extern a l l y - fa c i l i t ated advisory committee
c o m p rised of NGO leaders and bank
members and staff,” explains Gillian Dus-
t i n g, the bank’s public relations director.T h e
Citizens Bank also pledges to reply within
24 hours to all queries about its ethical
standards sent by e-mail, while its website
hosts a chatline on ethical inve s t m e n t .A f t e r
three ye a rs in bu s i n e s s , the Canadian bank
has deposits wo rth over $680 million, w h i l e
its pre-tax profits in 1998 were almost three
million dollars.
Credit and 
ethical banking
The power of ethical banks in the wo r l d
economy is still small,though it is growing
year by ye a r. According to figures publi-
shed by EIRIS, a research group on ethical
finance, the total volume of ethical funds
i nvested in the United Kingdom rose from
$3,300 to $4,100 million between Ja n u a ry
1999 and January 2000.The Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), meanwhile, recognizes that
although ethical banks “ h ave had some suc-
c e s s , they are far from changing the at t i t u d e s
of conventional banking institutions”. I n
OE C D’s opinion, the banks’ main at t r a c-
tion is that they offer social firms an alter-
native response to the problems of getting
credit.
David Perry, head of the Markkula
Centre for Applied Ethics at California’s
Santa Clara Unive rs i t y, c o n c u rs that
“such banks are sometimes the only
means of obtaining loans for people with
no credit history and no major assets. And
they often combine loans with training in
starting and running businesses, which
can be extremely helpful to folks with no
experience in commerce.”
As for the future,G i ovanni A c q u at t i ,p r e-
sident of the Milan-based financial co-ope-
r at i ve MAG2 and a leading proponent of
ethical finance in Italy for the last 20 ye a rs ,
b e l i e ves it will “depend less on the invo l ve-
ment of public authorities like the Wo r l d
Bank or the European Commission, a n d
more on the strength, courage and resources
t h at we use in personally convincing people
t h at they should behave in a different way.
We have a lot of work to do, and we mustn’t
lose hope.And I never do.” ■

Triodos Bank supports the Flemish campaign for the prevention of HIV/Aids. Here, stands set up in Antwerp
(Belgium) on World Aids Day, December 1999.
