E T H I C S
On the eve of the U.S. presidential elections, the death penalty—repudiated by almost all democratic
nations—is notable only for its absence from debate. Abolitionists are changing their tactics to ‘win
over’ a majority
BY IVAN BRISCOE
UNESCO Courier JOURNALIST
hough the legal battle was arduous, G a r y
Gilmore eventually got what he had
longed for on January 17, 1977. Tied by
nylon rope to an office chair,with a white
target disc pinned to his chest, the petty
thief and lovesick murderer stared down
the barrels of five state rifle s.After ten idle
y e a r s, the firing squad in a Utah jailhouse
sent a signal around the world: e x e c u-
tions in the United States were back.
Since Gilmore’s landmark demise—
hastened by his own preference for death
in place of jail—a further 663 people have
f o l l o w e d , killed by lethal injections,e l e c-
tric currents or poison gas administered on
judicial orders. What started in the late
1970s as a dribble of ill-fated convicts had,
by the turn of the century, become a
regular feature of the nation’s public life,
played out to a peculiar combination of
silence from U. S.politicians and last-ditch
pleas for clemency from the European
U n i o n ,Amnesty International and other
moral bulwarks of the We s t .
The contrast with the rest of the demo-
cratic world—of which the United States
considers itself the leader—is more
marked on the issue of the death penalty
than possibly any other aspect of domestic
p o l i cy. While U. S. foreign policy bears
down on “rogue states,” its executioners
keep good rhythm with the likes of Iran
and Iraq (though remain way behind
U. S. death penalty:
victims seize 
the high gro u n d
Supporters of the death penalty celebrate an execution at the prison in Huntsville, Texas.

41
group leader, C h i n a ) . When a proposed
worldwide moratorium on the penalty
came up for debate in the UN Human
Right Commission in April 1999, the U. S.
predictably voted against, along with
C u b a , C h i n a , Sudan and nine other
n a t i o n s.Some 108 countries,on the other
h a n d , have in law or in practice abolished
the punishment, with Turkmenistan and
Ukraine among the most recent to enlist.
The appeal of 
tough justice
For the average high-level U. S. p o l i t i-
c i a n ,h o w e v e r, the death penalty has only
minor administrative defects, if any at all.
Of the four presidential and vice-presi-
dential candidates lining up in elections
on November 7, all support the punish-
ment—from Democrat candidate Al Gore
to Republican George W Bush, who has
ratcheted up its use in his last five years as
Texas governor,granting only one reprieve
and rubber-stamping 144 executions.P u b l i c
support for the penalty, in spite of a major
new abolitionist offensive that has helped
cut approval ratings from a high of 80 per
c e n t , still hovers over 60 per cent.
“I call it the silver bullet, in reference
to the Lone Ranger [a U. S. t e l e v i s i o n
series set in the Wild We s t ] ,” e x p l a i n s
Robert Bohm,a professor in criminology
and death penalty expert from the Uni-
versity of Central Florida.“A lot of people
in this country who are very fearful of
c r i m e, whether rationally or not, are loo-
king for a silver bullet to deal with it—and
the death penalty is a very attractive
b u l l e t .”
A host of arguments, used previously
by philosophers as venerable as Thomas
Aquinas and Je a n - Jacques Rousseau,
have helped make the penalty an emblem
of tough justice. Despite a lack of agreed
data,defenders of capital punishment in
the U.S. argue that the system is cheap,
acts as a deterrent and prevents suppo-
sedly “ l i b e r a l ”parole boards from relea-
sing jailed murderers into an unsuspecting
world—a practice that Dudley Sharp,
from the Justice For All project,says has
led to 10,000 killings since 1971.Above all
else, the penalty is vaunted as the only
true outlet for a society outraged by hei-
nous crimes; as Rousseau wrote, “ i n
killing the criminal, we destroy not so
much a citizen as an enemy.”
In response, a new generation of abo-
litionists has quietly shed its moral indi-
g n a t i o n . No longer are the lives of serial
killers and sociopaths held to be inhe-
rently worth preserving. I n s t e a d ,p r e s s -
friendly groups like the Death Penalty
Information Centre stress the injustices
of its application, from the racial inequi-
ties that it breeds to the risk that inno-
cents might be slaughtered.
For the Centre’s director, R i c h a r d
D i e t e r, this strategy aims to conquer
A m e r i c a ’s famed middle ground, t h a t
majority of people who seem to support
the penalty without great conviction or
p a s s i o n . “ The death penalty seems to
have all this baggage, all these problems
—innocent people, international oppo-
s i t i o n , u n f a i r n e s s, racial problems,” h e
a r g u e s. “ Th a t ’s a lot of baggage, and it
may not be worth it.” In January, to Die-
t e r ’s delight, Illinois’ Republican governor
shelved the penalty over concerns that
innocent people might be executed.The
g o v e r n o r, fit t i n g l y, had been a lifelong
supporter of capital punishment.
Miguel Angel Martinez is one of
around 3,600 inmates whose life is at
stake. In 1992, a Texan court found the
prospective Air Force cadet guilty of mur-
dering three men in a gang knife assault—
an attack in which his new lawyer insists
he was a “bit player.” He was sentenced
to death at the age of 17, four years before
he was legally entitled to drink beer.
Writing from what he terms the “ m a n -
made hell”of Terrell Unit in Texas, Mar-
tinez says he harbours hopes for the new
abolition campaign. But death row has
razed all his faiths. Religion he sees as a
“hollow vessel,” while society is a place of
hate: “you know, there is still an actual
conditioning in people to accept punish-
ment even when other options exist . . .We
are all sadists and masochists to a degree.”
For many outside the United States, i t
is precisely this unnecessary cruelty that
taints the death penalty, even though the
same countries that now scorn the punish-
ment enjoyed their own illustrious
moments with the noose, guillotine and
hatchet man. British law—which heavily
i n fluenced practice in its colonies—was
bent on execution. By the 18th century,
for instance,222 crimes were punishable by
death in Britain, including robbing a rabbit
warren and cutting down a tree.The public,
in turn,liked nothing better than a picnic at
the gallows.When one notorious murderer
was hanged in 1807 in London, 4 0 , 0 0 0
people turned up, though an ensuing mass
frenzy killed a hundred of them.
Following World War II and the
spread of codified human rights, m a n y
nations reconsidered,then scrapped the
p e n a l t y. But the United States proved an
exception to the rule: even in the ten-
year hiatus from 1967 to Gilmore’s exe-
c u t i o n , courts and states,acting on a tem-
porary plunge in the penalty’s popularity,
shunned what one Supreme Court justice
termed the “machinery of death” i n s t e a d
of dismantling it outright. Indeed when
the Supreme Court issued its Furman vs
G e o r g i a rulings in 1972, declaring the
penalty to be “cruel and unusual,” f u r i o u s
southern state legislators busied them-
selves with redrafting their statutes to
accommodate the Court’s objections.A s
violent crime climbed steeply upwards
in the recession-hit 1970s, a new-look
death penalty was ready and waiting in
several state law books. Some 38 states
now feature the sentence in their penal
c o d e s, while around three per cent of the
n a t i o n ’s convicted murderers are dispat-
ched to death row.
Victims’ rights and the
d raw of opinion polls
Underlying this penchant for capital
punishment—particularly marked in
eight southern states, home to 90 per cent
of recent executions—appears a deep-
rooted sense of what justice means.Wh e n
Alan Wo l f e, a Boston University politics
professor, went to Texas to research opi-
nions towards the 1998 execution of Karla
Faye Tu c k e r, he was astonished by the
r e s p o n s e : rather than feel pity for the
cheery 38-year-old inmate who had
repented and “found God,” most people
believed death to be perfect retribution
for her pickaxe slaying of an ex-lover.
“I think it touched on a very basic,
fundamental view of society that people
h a v e, that is pre-political and pre-religious,
that has to do with an inherent sense of
what justice means,”says Wo l f e.“ I t ’s about
paying for your sins and creating some
sort of equilibrium: a life is taken,and the-
refore another life should be taken.”
Retribution and scant pity for the
murderer dominate the thinking of those
who fervently back the penalty—espe-
cially the victims’ relatives.The first rela-
tive allowed under a new Texan law in
1996 to witness the execution of the mur-
derer recalled how “I would like to have
seen him humiliated a bit. I think he
should have been brought in and strapped
down in front of us.” In radio talks shows
across the land,callers demand that killers
be “fried”so they can “meet Hitler.”
The irony is that this atavistic sense of
justice is so out of synch with other trends
in U.S. culture. Most Christian teachings
“It’s about paying for your 
sins and creating 
some sort of equilibrium:
a life is taken,
and therefore another 
life should be taken”

innocent lives may have been shed.Die-
t e r ’s centre lists 87 people exonerated
from death row since the penalty’s reins-
t a t e m e n t , while several DNA tests are
currently underway in an effort to dis-
cover the first scientific confirmation of an
executed innocent.
Racial bias in imposition of the death
penalty has provided yet further ammu-
nition for the punishment’s opponents.
Although black murderers are propor-
tionately under-represented on death
r o w, there is undeniable statistical evi-
dence showing that death penalties are
imposed almost entirely (over 80 per-
cent) when victims are white. In Georgia,
meanwhile, Mears reports that only one
out of 159 district attorneys is black. For
many campaigners, says criminology pro-
fessor Robert Bohm,the penalty is simply
“a new form of social control that
replaced slavery.”
Calls for a moratorium
In the case of Martinez, prejudice (he
is Mexican-American),poverty, and the
fact that an accomplice’s father was a
local judge appeared to have vitiated all
chance of leniency. Indeed his legal saga
reads like a litany of the death penalty’s
i n i q u i t i e s : his trial lasted five days, t h e
alleged accomplices are free, and a large
part of the local district attorney’s office
has since been sacked for taking bribes.
“It is like two people playing chess, one
who is very good at it and another who is
just learning how the pieces move,” he
recalls of his trial.
His case and others have led campai-
gners to hope a moratorium may be
called as the “silver bullet” is sullied by
procedural failure, and maybe buried by
a richer variety of crime policies.S c e p t i c s
for their part warn that the machinery of
death could just be reinvented in a
s l e e k e r, “ f a i r e r ” g u i s e. But one thing
seems clear: if the penalty goes, it will not
go at the behest of an ethical revolution.
As Wolfe argues, “if you leave out the
morality entirely, I think A m e r i c a n s
would be very sympathetic to halting or
at least slowing capital punishment.” ■
42 The UNESCO Courier - October 2000
point to the importance of forgiveness,
and most Americans are practising Chris-
tians. Daytime television has made the-
r a p y, and its motifs of confessing past sins
and reinvention,central to people’s lives.
But murder and punishment,above all in
the south, still follow the dictates of an
“eye for an eye.”And while violent crimes
soared over the past two decades, c l a i-
ming the lives of 500,000 Americans (with
around 17,000 murders a year at present)
and drawing gruesome media coverage,
adherence to this philosophy of uncom-
plicated vengeance grew inexorably.Th e
victim—and concepts of victimhood—
now stand at the heart of the modern
U. S. death penalty, whether in the sen-
tencing phase of the murder trial,when
bereaved relatives take the stand, or in
state politicians’ rhetoric.“If the debate
is just over the penalty or not the death
p e n a l t y,” sighs Dieter, “ i t ’s like asking
whether you’re for criminals or victims.”
Public opinion in countries like Bri-
tain or France, however, was hardly very
different.In almost all cases, clear majo-
rities supported the penalty, though poli-
tical leaders resolved to push through
with abolition all the same. Politicians in
the United States, on the other hand,
have been unwilling or unable to emulate
these feats. The generation that was so
closely linked to the civil rights era—the
Ke n n e d y s, Martin Luther King—may
have been equipped to do so,but its fig u-
reheads were fated to die early. M e a-
ningful debate has been further impeded
by the penalty’s deployment at state level,
often boxing the issue into a local crime
perspective, and by the absence of other
proposals such as gun control or poverty
programmes, ruled out by costs and lob-
b i e s.But more than any other factor, it is
what observers see as the frenetic nature
of U. S.d e m o c r a cy, with its comparatively
weak political parties, incessant elections
and hyper-sensitivity to opinion polls,
that has exposed candidates to constant
courting of voters’ hunches.
The price of opposing the penalty
became evident in the mishaps of Michael
D u k a k i s, Democratic presidential candi-
date in 1988, who turgidly repeated his
opposition to the penalty when asked
what he would do if his wife and children
were slain and thus was branded “ w e a k ”
on crime. All politicians swiftly learnt
that support for the penalty, though it
may not have mattered to them much as
an issue, was a vote-securing synonym
for “ t o u g h n e s s ” on crime. For elected dis-
trict attorneys (local prosecutors), who
often later become judges,exploitation of
the issue became rife.“ I t ’s a quick way to
get on television and get your name in the
p a p e r,” says Michael Mears, from the
Georgia Indigent Defense Council.“It’s
a placebo for the public, like giving the
patient a sugar-coated tablet.”
With victims occupying the moral
high ground and politicians unable to
draw themselves away from the glitter
of a poll booster, the practical tack taken
by the new abolitionists seems sensible.
Already they appear to have convinced
the majority of the American public that

Protestors rally against the execution of Gary Graham in Texas (June 2000).
