K e nyan conservationists still shudder
at the thought of the 1980s, w h e n
hardly a day went by without park
r a n g e rs discove ring carcasses of elephants
felled with increasingly sophisticat e d
we a p o n s , their ivo ry tusks crudely hacked
o f f. S h o rt of funds and staff,K e nyan rangers
could neither adequately patrol their reserve s
nor match the poachers ’ fir e p owe r.
So it is hardly surprising that conser-
vationists and the Kenyan government
breathed a sigh of relief in 1989 when
parties to the Convention on Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) voted to
ban all international trade in ivory prod-
ucts. Had it not been for this decision,the
country’s elephant population would be
close to extinct today. From an estimated
140,000 elephants in 1972, the popula-
tion in Kenya ’s parks fell to a mere
19,000 in 1989.
Porous borders
The ban, along with world-wide cam-
paigns against trade in elephant products,
reduced the demand for ivory and, conse-
quently, its price. Poaching declined in
Kenya and in other countries with ele-
phant herds. At the same time, the Kenya
Wildlife Services (KWS) beefed up its
anti-poaching units in the country’s 26
national parks and 32 game reserves. As a
result, the elephant population gradually
increased and today Kenya has about
27,000 elephants.
This recovery nonetheless suffered a
setback in 1997, when CITES parties
voted to partially lift the ban on ivory
trade to enable Zimbabwe, Namibia and
Botswana to conduct a one-off sale of 60
tonnes from their stockpiles. The opera-
tion brought in three million dollars ,
which the countries concerned claimed to
have channelled into conservation efforts.
But conservationists affirm that even this
strictly controlled trading fuelled demand
for ivory and led to renewed elephant
poaching. According to Kenyan officials,
67 elephants were killed last year for
ivory, up from an average of about 15 in
the previous years—a figure they claim is
directly linked to the limited trade
a l l owed in 1997. ‘‘ Poaching continues
because there is still a demand and bor-
ders within Africa are porous, thus mak-
ing it easy for ivory to be transported
across the continent,’’ s ays Francis
Mukungu, a senior KWS official.
Kenya’s vehement opposition to any
lifting of the ivory trade ban during the
April 2000 CITES conference can be
understood in this light. Nor can tourism
be ove r l o o k e d : o f ficials are concern e d
that a return to the poaching levels of the
1980s will cut into the country’s number
one foreign exchange earner. Once again,
Botswana,Namibia and Zimbabwe, along
with South Africa, urged a lifting of the
ban to sell off legally accumulated ivory
s t o c k p i l e s. K e nya argued that such a
move would send out a message saying
there is no harm in buying ivory products,
thus encouraging poachers.
As a compromise, CITES signatories
agreed to continue with a total ban on
international trade in elephant ivory for
the next three years while allowing a lim-
ited trade in non-ivory elephant products
such as hides, live animals and leather
products.
Sharing tourist revenue
While the Kenyan gove rnment is
determined to save its elephants from
poachers,public opinion within the coun-
try is divided on the issue. Rural commu-
nities living close to game reserves com-
plain that elephant herds often invade
their farms and destroy crops, sometimes
causing casualties. In contrast to South
African reserves, elephants are not fenced
off and freely roam over hundreds of
acres. Rural populations also claim that
tourism revenues generated by entries to
the game reserves are never invested in
their poverty-ridden areas. In their minds,
efforts to save these animals at all costs
are a case of misplaced priorities in a
country where the majority live below the
poverty line. Conservationists assert that
in the long run, Kenya’s success in saving
its elephant population will lie in involv-
ing the local communities around the
r e s e rves in tourism and conservat i o n
efforts, and making sure that they benefit
economically from these initiatives. ■



K EN YA’S EL EPHANTS: 
NO HALF ME ASURES
◗ Joan Simba
Even when strictly controlled,
the ivory trade encourages
elephant poaching and drives
away tourists. Kenya’s
position on the trade
prevailed at the most 
recent CITES meeting
◗ Nairobi-based journalist
In Kenya, ivory tusks go up in smoke as wildlife guards watch on.
