Are the vast majority of languages doomed
to die out in the near future? Specialists
reckon that no language can surv i ve
unless 100,000 people speak it. Half of the
6,000 or so languages in the world today are
spoken by fewer than 10,000 people and a quar-
ter by less than 1,000. Only a score are spoken
by hundreds of millions of people.
The death of languages is not a new pheno-
m e n o n . Since languages dive rs i fie d , at least
30,000 (some say as many as half a million) of
them have been born and disappeared, often
without leaving any trace.Languages usually have
a relatively short life span as well as a very high
d e ath rat e . Only a few, including Basque,
E g y p t i a n , C h i n e s e , G r e e k , H e b r e w, L at i n ,
Persian, Sanskrit and Tamil, have lasted more
than 2,000 years.
Minority languages
sidelined
What is new, however, is the speed at which
they are dying out. Europe’s colonial conquests
caused a sharp decline in linguistic diversity, eli-
minating at least 15 per cent of all languages spo-
ken at the time. Over the last 300 years, Europe
has lost a dozen, and Australia has only 20 left of
the 250 spoken at the end of the 18th century. In
Brazil, about 540 (three-quarters of the total)
h ave died out since Po rtuguese colonizat i o n
began in 1530.
The rise of nation-states, whose territorial
unity was closely linked to their linguistic homo-
geneity, has also been decisive in selecting and
consolidating national languages and sidelining
others. By making great efforts to establish an
official language in education, the media and the
civil service, national governments have delibera-
tely tried to eliminate minority languages.
This process of linguistic standardization has
been boosted by industrialization and scientific
progress, which have imposed new methods of
communication that are swift, straightforward
and practical. Language diversity came to be seen
18 The UNESCO Courier - April 2000



6,000 languages:
an e m b a t t l e d
h e r i t a g e
◗ Ranka Bjeljac-Babic
Ten languages die out each year.
International action is needed to counter 
this erosion of cultural divers i t y
◗ Lecturer and specialist 
in the psychology of language at
the University of Poitiers (France)

as an obstacle to trade and the spread of know-
ledge. Monolingualism became an ideal, and at
the end of the 19th century the notion of a uni-
versal language was born—a return to Latin was
even considered—which gave rise to a spate of
a rt i ficial languages, the first of which wa s
Volapük. The one that gained the widest accep-
tance and has survived longest is Esperanto.
More recently, the intern at i o n a l i z ation of
financial markets, the dissemination of informa-
tion by electronic media and other aspects of glo-
balization have intensified the threat to “small”
languages. A language not on the Internet is a lan-
guage that “no longer exists” in the modern
world. It is out of the game.It is not used in busi-
ness.
The rate of language extinction has now rea-
ched the unprecedented worldwide level of 10
every year. Some people predict that 50 to 90 per
cent of today’s spoken languages will disappear
during this century. Their preservation is an
urgent matter.
The effects of the death of languages are
serious for several reasons. First of all, it is pos-
sible that if we all ended up speaking the same
language, our brains would lose some of their
natural capacity for linguistic inventiveness. We
would never be able to plumb the origins of

human language or resolve the mystery of “the
first language”. As each language dies, a chapter
of human history closes .
Multilingualism is the most accurate reflec-
tion of multiculturalism. The destruction of the
first will inevitably lead to the loss of the second.
Imposing a language without any links to a peo-
ple’s culture and way of life stifles the expression
of their collective genius. A language is not only
the main instrument of human communication.
It also expresses the world vision of those who
speak it, their imagination and their ways of using
knowledge.
Dying whispers
of traditional cultures
To grasp how differently each tongue reflects
the world, one only needs to list the words that
crop up in every language with exactly the same
meaning, words like I, you, us, who, what, no, all,
one, two, big, long, small, woman, man, eat, see,
hear, sun, moon, star, water, fire, hot,cold, white,
black, night, land. There are about 300 at the
most.
The threat to multilingualism is similar to the
threat to biodiversity. Not just because most lan-
guages are like disappearing “species”, but becau-
se there is an intrinsic and causal link between
biological diversity and cultural diversity. Like

plant and animal species, endangered languages
are confined to small areas. More than 80 per
cent of countries that have great biological diver-
sity are also places with the greatest number of
endemic languages. This is because when people
adapt to their environment, they create a special
stock of knowledge about it which is mirrored in
their language and often only there. Many of the
world’s endangered plant and animal species
today are known only to certain peoples whose
languages are dying out. As they die, they take
with them all the traditional knowledge about the
environment.
The 1992 Rio Earth Summit set up machine-
ry to combat shrinking biodiversity. Now it is
time for a Rio summit to tackle languages. The
need to protect languages began to be apprecia-
ted in the middle of the 20th century, when lan-
guage rights were included in the Unive rs a l
Declaration of Human Rights (article 2). Since
then, a number of instruments have been adop-
ted, and projects have been launched (see pages
30-31) to safeguard what is now considered a
heritage of humanity. These laws and initiatives
may not prevent languages from dying out, but at
least they will slow down the process and encou-
rage multilingualism. ■
