The South’s fragile states
Developing countries are still wrestling with the business of fashioning a nation-state and building structures which in
the West grew and matured over several centuries into modern, integrated societies.These societies only became demo-
cratic after going through an industrial revolution.
Until the late 1980s, the construction of nation-states in the countries of the South was seriously hampered by colo-
nization and then by the Cold Wa r.Before independence, nothing was done to integrate the different peoples living insi-
de artificially drawn frontiers. In fact,the colonial powers conducted a policy of divide and rule.
Then during the decades of East-West confrontation, heads of state only won power through their loyalty to one side
or the other, not because they were good rulers. The great powers clearly played a hand in this by often backing dicta-
tors at the expense of certain “founding fathers of independence”who had better intentions towards their people.
To d a y, a third generation of rulers is gradually taking the reins in the countries of the South, mostly as a result of more
or less democratic elections. But when these leaders are called upon by their subjects, sometimes violently, to install real
democracy and develop their countries, they more than ever lack the means to do so.
Development aid has fallen by 20 per cent since the end of the Cold Wa r. Interest payments on debt are an increasing
burden on government fin a n c e s. Structural adjustment programmes have eroded the legitimacy of the state by dis-
mantling public services and widening the gap between the haves and the have-nots. The deterioration of the environ-
m e n t , notably soil degradation (six million hectares are lost every year) and deforestation (10 million hectares destroyed
each year), is depleting vital resources already in short supply.Another destabilizing factor is that 60 per cent of the worl-
d’s weaponry ends up in developing countries.
So how can young and fragile states be strengthened? How can people be persuaded,as they struggle to survive, n o t
to look to their clan or tribe as a way of defending themselves, when their government can neither guarantee their secu-
rity nor a basic standard of living? 
Making fine speeches about good governance is not enough in poor countries handicapped by the heavy legacy of
the past. Such countries must have access to development, and the North, which in the past built its prosperity partly on
their lands, their manpower and their natural resources, must help them. n
Mohamed Sahnoun, special envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General in Africa
