Do you think research to decode the human
genome should be placed in the public
domain?
We cannot patent basic knowledge of
the sequence.What we possess in our own
organisms, biologically speaking, cannot
be patented even by law. But applications
derived from knowledge of our genes can
be. The U.S. company Celera Genomics
seems to be leading the race to decode the
entire human genome sequence.
According to press reports, the firm has
already decoded the entire sequence—
some 50 million “bits” of DNA—though
they still have to fit the pieces together,
rather like a jigsaw puzzle. On the other
side is the public consortium, made up of
teams from a number of countries wor-
king through their national public health
i n s t i t u t e s , which are proceeding more
slowly and hope to finish the sequencing
in two years’ time. But they are progres-
sing in a more orderly fashion. So that
when they do finish the sequences, they
will know exactly where each part goes.At
first the private company tried to patent
the sequences, and there were many
public fig u r e s , including some ve ry
renowned scientists such as the presidents
of the American Academy of Science and
of the British Royal Society, who opposed
the “patentability” of gene sequences. Bill
Clinton and Tony Blair also protested.
The company seems to have backed down
and will make its results public. However,
what can be patented are the possible
uses of those sequences in methods to
cure specific illnesses.
Are we witnessing the excessive
commercialisation of science?
Pa rt l y, ye s. There might be excessive
c o m m e r c i a l i s ation if the proper limits are
not imposed.There is an interesting case in
connection with cloning: scientists from a
research institute at the Unive rsity of
Wisconsin succeeded in 1998 in deri v i n g



M A RG A RI TA SA LAS :
K NO W L EDGE 
TO DISPEL FE A R
Margarita Salas, a Spanish pioneer in molecular biology, dismisses alarmist reactions to recent
scientific advances and stays thoroughly optimistic on all fronts
and culturing human embryonic stem cells
—cells that are the parent cells of all tissues
in the body.The achievement has profound
i m p l i c ations for transplant medicine. O n l y
p ri vate firms currently fund this wo r k ,
because in the United States there is a law
banning the public funding of research
based on human embryo s. It is ve ry dange-
rous to let this sort of work remain solely in
p ri vate hands. These firms will be able to
p atent their findings and make people fork
out presumably large sums of money when
they have to undergo transplant operat i o n s.
If the funding came from public sources,
this monopoly wo u l d n ’t exist.
But are governments investing enough in basic
research?
I t ’s impossible to make generalisat i o n s.
The percentage of gross domestic product
e a rmarked for research in places like the
United States or in some of the most deve-
loped European countries hove rs around
t wo to 2.5 per cent, sometimes even more.
Spain has one of the lowest levels of resear-
ch funding in Europe, standing at 0.9 per
c e n t , one point below the European Union
ave r a g e , so there’s a long way for us to go.
The interesting thing about pri vate fun-
ding is that it comes not just from bu s i-
n e s s e s , but also from foundations and eve n
from individuals. In the United Stat e s , f o r
e x a m p l e , people who contri bute to resear-
ch funding are entitled to deduct it from
their taxe s , which is not the case in coun-
t ries like Spain. I t ’s vital to promote fis c a l
policies that encourage people to fund
r e s e a r c h .
What are the potential risks of privately
funded research?
It’s dangerous if the results are witheld
and patented in such a way that licenses
are required to use the data.
Scientific research is a highly competitive field.
Is there room for cooperation?
In the first place, scientists do not
work alone. This is no longer the era of
Ramón y Cajal.1 Whether or not they
share affinities, scientists must work in
1. Santiago Ramón y Cajal. Spanish neurologist
(1852-1934). Nobel prize for physiology and
medicine in 1906.
A life’s vocation: Margarita Salas in her lab at Madrid’s Universidad Autónoma.

teams for the simple reason that it’s
impossible for an isolated individual to
g ather enough knowledge to have an
international impact. In the European
Union, for instance, we are seeing increa-
sing cooperation, because support and
funding are granted to teams formed by
groups from different countries. But in
the private sector, groups working at the
cutting edge of science strive to get there
before their competitors because of the
huge economic stakes involved.
Are scientists doing anything 
to narrow the research gap between 
North and South?
Researchers from the South take part
in some collaborative projects and attend
major intern ational congr e s s e s , but in
general this cooperation has more to do
with institutional reasons than with any
political will to narrow the gap.
Why does cloning frighten people?
Because they think of human cloning
and that scientists will run amok with it.
That’s ridiculous. First, the technology
we have at the moment falls far short of
enabling us to produce cloned humans,
though it’s clear that it will improve until
that becomes possible. But then, what is
the point of making individuals who are
all alike? Over 20 years ago, when the
issue of in vitro fertilisation arose, people
said it was horrific, that it wasn’t natural.
They wondered what sort of children
would be born from this technology.
Would they turn out like monsters? All
sorts of things were said. The first girl
born via this technique is now 23 or 24
years old. She’s perfectly normal and in
vitro fertilisation has solved many fertility
problems. So has it been good or bad for
humanity?
So do you defend cloning?
Once again, we have to make a few dis-
t i n c t i o n s. I think human cloning to produ-
ce individual human beings is repellent,
and in some countries there are law s
against it. But we can envisage cloning a
few stem cells to produce useful organ tis-
sues towards therapeutic ends, or animal
cloning for the same purpose or to make
d ru g s. For example, a gi ven gene can be
implanted in a sheep. These genetically-
m o d i fied animals can then be cloned to
produce large quantities of factor IX, w h i c h
is necessary for blood coagulation and is
used in the treatment of haemophilia.
Should limits be placed on scientific research
to prevent abuse?
Scientists themselves have demanded
that their discoveries not be used against
humanity. Furthermore, bioethics com-
mittees involving scientists have spread all
over the world in the past ten years and
are working with the same aims.The main
purpose of cloning is to obtain useful tis-
sues which can, for example, mitigate the
problem of the body rejecting organ
transplants. There was a proposal to keep
cells from the umbilical cords of new-
borns so that in the future stem cells
could be obtained in order to make tis-
sues. That way, if someone needed an
organ transplant, his or her own cells
would be readily available, and doctors
would be able to culture new tissue from
them. That would circumvent the pro-
blem of rejection and therefore be a very
positive step forward.
Another scientific advance which has sparked
an uproar is genetically modified organisms.
What is your opinion?
Those fears are entirely based on a lack of
k n ow l e d g e . N ature changes slowly all the
time so that it can adapt. In the laborat o ry,
those changes are simply accelerat e d .
Green deputies protesting against cloning at the European Parliament in Strasbourg.

crops to arid soil. Though from the
United States, he lived for a long time in
Mexico, and is totally in favour of geneti-
cally modified plants. He thinks the
movement against them is ridiculous in
light of all his work to enable plants to
grow in dry soil.
You seem to have perfect trust in the intrinsic
goodness of scientists.
Science in general is moving in the
right direction, towards helping humani-
ty, not perverting it. New cloning and tis-
sue transplant technology is developed for
the good of human beings. There is no
reason to be afraid, on the contrary.
What can scientists do to put that message
across?
I believe there are more scientists
interested in humanism than the other
way around,because humanists think that
science is too difficult to understand.That
is exactly why the Instituto de España,



A LIFE FOR SCIENCE
Since 19 01, when the Swedish Academy set
up Nobel prizes for achievements in various
s c i e n t i fic disciplines, only 11 women, compared
with 435 men, have received one of the awards.
But with the help of programmes to support
women’s involvement in scientific research
sponsored by UNES CO and the European
Commission, the careers and commitment of
s e v e ral female pioneers have proved that scien-
ce is no longer an all-male domain. Margarita
Salas has faith that “in the not too distant futu-
re women will achieve a rate of participation in
the professional world and in society high
enough for them to believe that they matter at
all levels and in every situation. And not beca u-
se there are quotas: I’m totally against quotas
for women. It’s up to us to conquer the space
that we deserve.” She has done just that by
devoting herself entirely to her profession: “I
like other things too, like music or art… I go to
concerts and exhibitions, but research is the
purpose of my life,” she says. 
Born in Canero in Spain’s Asturias in 1938,
Salas was 16 when the “yearning for discove-
ry” took her to Madrid to study chemistry. At
19 she met Severo Ochoa, who won the Nobel
Prize for Medicine the following year. Ochoa
encouraged her to write a doctoral thesis in
Madrid and, later, to work with him in his New
York laboratory. Today, this molecular biolo-
gist’s résumé is 24 pages long and includes—
besides two honoris causa degrees and over
200 studies and articles in scientific journals—
UNESCO’s Carlos J. Finley prize (1991) and the
Jaime I research prize (1994), among others.
Since 1995, she has headed the Instituto de
España. On January 10, 2000, UNESCO Director-
General Koïchiro Matsuura presented her in
Paris with the UNESCO-L’Oréal prize for the best
European scientist of 1999, an honour for
which 34 candidates were competing. Four
other scientists, one for each continent, were
awarded the same prize. ■

Fa rm e rs have traditionally modified plants
through genetic crossbreeding which gene-
r ates seeds that can gr ow in ari d , saline or
other soils. This was possible after a lot of
time and wo r k , and nobody thought it wa s
w r o n g,e ven though it came down to geneti-
cally modifying the seeds.A skin graft is also
a genetic modific at i o n ,though people are not
afraid of it. And genetically modified plants
are no different. Among the 50,000 or
100,000 genes that a plant contains,only one
or two different ones are added to make them
resistant to insects, to a viru s ,or to saline soil.
This is done through ve ry simple experi m e n t s
t h at can last days or we e k s.W hy are people
afraid? Because they don’t know what ’s invo l-
ve d . On the other hand, e ve ry genetically
m o d i fied plant has been tested before it is put
on the market. I do think that food which
comes from genetically modified plants
should be properly labelled so the consumer
can decide. But eating products that come
from genetically modified plants does not
entail any sort of ri s k : I myself would have no
objections to eating them.
What is the exact motive behind creating
genetically modified organisms?
Genetically modified plants can have
nothing but benefits for the human spe-
cies.The other day I read about a kind of
genetically modified rice which produces
a 35 per cent greater crop yield. The
importance for countries suffering from
famines is obvious. It’s true that those
seeds are patented, but over time the
patents will fall into the public domain
and the seeds will be cheaper. Not long
ago we received a visit from Norman
Borlaug, an agronomist who won the
1970 Nobel Prize for his work in adapting

It’s a virus which infects the Bacillus
s u b t i l i s, a non-pathogenic bacteri u m
which is widely used in biotechnology.
When the virus infects this bacterium it
destroys it, but causes no damage to other
organisms. Phi-29 is simple and easy to
handle; it has only 20 genes, in compari-
son to the 100,000 which the human
genome contains. N e ve rt h e l e s s , t h e
control mechanism of this virus is pretty
sophisticated, which makes it something
of a model system. As a result, what we
are studying in the virus can be extrapola-
ted to other virus systems in more com-
plex animals and organisms. The protein
that we have studied in this virus also
exists in a similar form in other viruses
which are not innocuous, or “bad” shall
we say, because they cause diseases like
poliomyelitis, hepatitis B or hepatitis C.
What professional achievement are you most
proud of?
A c t u a l l y, there are two. One is ve ry per-
s o n a l . When I was working in the Seve r o
Ochoa laborat o ry, I found two previously
u n k n own proteins necessary to start syn-
thesising proteins. It was a ve ry import a n t
breakthrough and ve ry satisfying for me,
especially since I was just starting out and
working alone. My second major achieve-
ment was in Spain. I was part of a team that
d i s c overed another protein which is closely
linked to the nucleic acid of the virus on
which we are wo r k i n g .We proved that it wa s
n e c e s s a ry for the replication of viral DNA.
And your greatest disappointment?
A scientist cannot expect success
e ve ry day. There are disappointments
throughout a scientist’s life. There are
times when experiments don’t work, or
when you get stuck in a dead-end and
have to change direction, but they are
minor setbacks and never too serious. I
don’t think I’ve ever had a major disap-
pointment. Besides, I’m an optimist.
Would you say that there is a feminine and a
masculine way of conducting research?
In over 20 years of teaching I’ve had
male and female doctoral and post-docto-
ral students,and I don’t think there is any
single feature that really sets them apart.
Having said that, women have perhaps
been less aggressive and more patient,
while men have tried to be the first to
come up with results. Nowadays, women
are beginning to acquire a level of educa-
tion that is making them bolder about not
always staying one step behind men and
always being more patient than they are.
Apart from that nuance, I don’t see any
differences.
What would you say to a female student who
wants to dedicate her life to scientific
research?
My advice would be the same for a
woman or a man, which is that if they real-
ly enjoy scientific research, they must
u n d e rstand that they will have to dedicat e
t h e m s e l ves 100 per cent to it.There are no
half measures.You either gi ve your life to it,
or you don’t . If you are really prepared to
d e vote all your time to research, then go
a h e a d . And then I tell them it’s for life. ■
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, 
UNESCO Courier journalist
which I head and which includes the eight
n ational academies, o f f e rs a series of
conferences that give scientists the chan-
ce to discuss and popularise phy s i c s ,
mathematics and genetics in a rigorous
but simple way, using language the public
can understand. We must work towards
popularising science more widely. That
means extra effort by scientists, but it
ought to be a duty.
What do you think the most important areas
of research will be in this century?
I think one of the most important is the
b r a i n . It is the essential key yet to be disco-
ve r e d : w hy we think, w hy we speak, w h at
the molecular mechanisms are behind our
thought processes. M a ny people are wo r-
king in that area. B e s i d e s , as John Maddox ,
who was editor of N at u r e magazine for
m a ny ye a rs has said, the human being’s
intellectual capacity is so gr e at that at some
point in the future there will be nothing left
to discove r.
Will that lead to boredom?
We l l , neither you nor I will be around to
see it. Take the example we just discussed
c o n c e rning sequencing the human genome,
which is known as “the beginning of the
e n d .” I t ’s one thing to have the sequence
and quite another to know what it is wo rt h
and to understand the function of each one
of our 100,000 genes. By current estimat e s ,
t h at will take another 100 ye a rs , so I don’t
think we’ll have time to get bored.
You’ve spent the last 30 years working with
the phagocytic cell Phi-29. Could you explain
what this is?
