year. Its farewell editorial said that “the present
situation makes it no longer possible to publish a
newspaper which believes in democracy, plura-
lism and respect for human rights.”
The turning-point came after Khelassi met
Rolf Gauffin, a retired Swedish diplomat and a
well-known expert on the Middle East and the
Maghreb. In the mid-1990s, Gauffin had covered
Algeria as a journalist, so he knew how hard it
was to get unbiased news. Every time he visited
the country, he was assigned bodyguards by the
authorities. All foreign journalists were obliged to
have bodyguards to “guarantee their security” but
in fact this was the best way for the government
to restrict their activities and intimidate people
they spoke to.
In 1996, a plan for an independent mains-
tream newspaper reporting on political,economic
and social matters was presented to the Swedish
Development Agency (SIDA). “Our idea was to
set up a paper written by Algerians for Algerians,
with reporters living and working inside the coun-
try, and so give Algerian journalists a chance to
write freely,” says Gauffin. But the project was
soon dropped in favour of a news-paper which
would be put on the Internet.
Building a network of correspondents 
Publishing on the Internet meant minimal
production costs and free distri bu t i o n . Fe w
Algerians have access to the Internet, but the
Swedish backers counted on people’s ingenuity to
boost the paper’s readership by printing it out
and photocopying it. Another big advantage was
that the Internet would give the paper a worldwi-
de readership, especially as it would be in both
English and French. “The Internet enabled us to
exist. Without it, we probably would never have
1.Usually defined as newspapers controlled neither by the
government nor a political party and seeking to publish
non-partisan news.

People had dreamed about publishing unbia-
sed news of the crisis in Algeria but saw no
easy way to do it. Until the Internet came
along.
Journalists have long been unable to work
freely in Algiers. The independent press1 was the
first target of the authorities and the armed fac-
tions, which had a shared interest in snuffing out
dissent. Algerian journalists, faced with censor-
ship and more and more of their number being
killed, tried to start newspapers outside the coun-
try. But their efforts failed, often because of lack
of resources or because would-be financial bac-
kers lacked credibility. The only real successes
were a handful of supplements on Algeria written
by Algerian journalists and published in the inter-
national press, which showed there was a demand
for news about the country.
Noureddine Khelassi was one of the journa-
lists who dreamed of starting up a newspaper
abroad, though he had no funds to do so. He had
worked on the independent press at the end of the
1980s as editor of the daily paper La Nation. But
like many of his colleagues, he was forced to flee
Algiers in 1993 after an attempt to kill one of his
journalists. The paper closed on March 30 that
A l g e r i a D o t - C o m
◗ Djallal Malti
Algeria-Interface uses the Internet to put out ‘completely impartial news’ about A l g e r i a

be found by any search engine. “We had 90,000
hits between December 1 and 13, and we’ve had
550,000 since we started in November,” says
Derradji. “Easily a third of them have come from
France, which has a large Algerian community.
Another third have come from Algeria and the
rest from countries such as Canada, Belgium and
Switzerland, where there are sizeable communi-
ties of Algerians who have been exiled because of
the conflict.”
Gearing up
for real-time working
Encouraged by this success and with a large
amount of news to put online, Algeria-Interface
switched from fortnightly to weekly. “We’re now
p r e p a ring to work in real time,” s ay s
Benramdane, “but we’ve got a lot of problems to
solve before we get there.”
First there is the matter of the Internet in
Algeria itself, where there is only one Internet ser-
vice provider,CERIST, which is controlled by the
government and sometimes people have to make
dozens of attempts before they can connect.The
authorities are afraid that they won’t be able to
control the Internet, so they have still not allowed
it to develop freely.
Another problem is how to invo l ve local jour-
n a l i s t s. They are sometimes totally taken up with
their regular jobs and many have not yet visited
the A l ge ri a - I n t e r fa c e web site. “The Internet isn’t
yet part of people’s daily lives and some are not
sure whether a journal can be a serious enterp ri-
se if it isn’t printed on paper,” s ays Benramdane.
But most of all there are problems of funding.
The Internet means about a two-thirds saving in
production costs, but overall costs are still nearly
$24,000 a month. “The fact that the money
comes from Sweden—a neutral country with a
solid anti-colonial tradition where there wa s
strong popular and official support for Algeria’s
war of independence—gives immediate credibili-
ty to Algeria-Interface,” says Gauffin. “But we
know we have to broaden our sources of funding
to ensure long-term viability.”
Substantial investment is needed to finance
serious investigative reporting and news gathe-
ring. The Internet is a valuable tool for dissemi-
nating unbiased news and getting round some
kinds of censorship, but it does not solve the more
important problem of financial independence. ■
+ …
● 


http://www.algeria-interface.com/
come out,” says Gauffin.
As soon as SIDA released the funds,with help
from the Olof Palme International Centre, a
Swedish NGO, the small team on the paper,
which was called Algeria-Interface, started work.
They were based in Paris and consisted of an
accountant, two part-time journalists and an edi-
tor, Djamel Benramdane. They soon found an
office and bought computers. Within weeks they
had set up an Internet web site.
Benramdane had been working for some time
on the trickiest aspect of the project: during his
many trips to Algeria he had set about building
up a network of reliable and professional corres-
pondents. The network, consisting of a dozen
people, soon got off the ground. For the moment,
the reporters prefer not to have bylines in print,
partly to protect themselves but also to avoid
making fellow journalists jealous, since Algeria-
Interface pays its contributors a lot more than they
would get in Algiers.
A crucial
interview
A l ge ri a - I n t e r fa c e went online at the begi n n i n g
of November 1999 with the declared aim of
“ r e p o rting the news completely objectively while
remaining faithful to the basic principles of free-
dom of expression and press freedom, defence of
human rights and promotion of democrat i c
va l u e s ” . The paper was launched quietly at a
reception in Pa ri s. “ We sent inv i t ations to the
A l g e ri a n , Tunisian and Moroccan embassies,”
s ays Ta o u fiq Derr a d j i , the head of Inforu m , t h e
p u b l i s h e rs of A l ge ri a - I n t e r fa c e, “ but only the
Moroccans turned up.”
The real test came a few weeks later, when
Abdelkader Hachani, the number three man in
the former Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), was
murdered in Algiers on December 13. “At the
time, negotiations were in full swing between the
regime and the Islamists over how to apply the
law on civil peace,” says Benramdane, “so I
thought it would be interesting to ask Hachani
what he thought. An Algeria-Interface reporter
met him the day before he was killed. As soon as
we heard he was dead, we put the interview onli-
ne, describing how we’d got it. We weren’t happy
about the situation, but it was a minor scoop and
we were mentioned by many other media, inclu-
ding the French daily Le Monde.”
That day the site was visited by a record 6,000
people. Algeria-Interface usually gets a fair num-
ber of hits, even though at that time it could not
