T IM BERNERS - L EE :
T HE WEB’S BRA INCHIL D
A staunch idealist, the British inventor of the World Wide Web is worth more than his weight
in gold. Tim Berners-Lee has shunned opportunities in the private sector to captain an
international consortium grouping the Web’s who’s who. His foremost goal: to keep on
improving the Web for the common good.
How do you account for the Web’s formidable
growth in the last 10 years?
The Web initially spread because of exis-
ting Internet infrastructure set up during the
1970s. By the time I had the idea for the
Web at the end of the 80s, computers in
m a ny unive rsities and institutes in the
United States and in Europe were already
connected to each other by cables exchan-
ging inform at i o n . So you have to gi ve credit
to those pioneers who put together such a
network before the Web’s arrival.
The Web spread fast because it wa s
decentralized and no one was controlling its
growth.The fact that anybody can start a
server or run a browser,without having to
register with any central authority, is what
a l l owed it to gr ow rapidly.There were enthu-
siasts all over the world who realized what
the world could be with the Web and
directed their efforts at developing it.
Also the Web’s openness is a powerful
at t r a c t i o n . E ve ryone can not only read
what’s on the Web but can also contribute
to it. Everybody is in a sense equal.This
sense of boundless opportunity also led to
its remarkable growth.
Does the Web stand to benefit those traditionally
on the margins of technological innovation?
It is obvious that the present imbalance
in society is unhealthy for the whole wo r l d .
But do not look to innovations alone for sol-

ving global issues. It is for people to make
decisions on how to manage themselve s
and it requires a lot of effort on all sides to
s o l ve va rious problems. We ’ ve had many
tools in the past and Internet can be another
tool in addressing those challenges.
The basic idea of the Web is that it is an
i n f o rm ation space through which people
can communicate, but communicate in a
special way, by sharing their knowledge in
a pool.The Web is more of a social creat i o n
than a technical one. It has not changed any-
thing fundamentally in the way human
beings think, read and communicate with
each other. It has gi ven people gr e at e r
choice than ever before by simply prov i-
ding information. Advantages of the Web
range from enhanced collaboration bet-
ween people in different countries to reading
a newspaper sitting in a remote village.
Though the Web has gi ven us many
c h o i c e s , we still don’t know how to use
those choices to our advantage. I hope the
fact that each individual has more choice
now will give us greater power to reformu-
late our society.
In your book Weaving the Web, you talk
about the danger of the Web being controlled
by a select group of companies or commercial
deeds blocking its growth. What would the
consequences be?
The danger is when large companies
t h at sell computers and software effective l y
s t a rt to control what inform ation you receive
on the Intern e t . Companies which offer free
c o m p u t e rs or Web brow s e rs could prevent a
user from utilizing or accessing progr a m m e s
of their commercial  competitors. E ve n
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) can have
commercial deals with certain Web sites,
making them easier to access than other
sites.This is already starting to happen.
On the one hand, people feel it’s reaso-
nable for a company to influence yo u r
I n t e rnet access if they provide you with
free computers and software progr a m m e s.
But on the other, it’s really important that
the right of the individual to access unbiased
i n f o rm ation be upheld.The point is that one
should not masquerade the other.
I’m not sure to what extent people rea-
lize or can measure whether their at t e m p t s
to access different websites are being
affected by commercial concerns. It’s also
ve ry difficult to find a balance between the
right of a company to offer a service which
is subsidized and the right of somebody to
h ave unbiased access.We have yet to find a
good social arrangement
Another danger is that if a company
establishes a monopoly, it will start making
arbitrary changes to universally accepted
Web standards.This would force competi-
t o rs to concentrate their efforts on mat-
ching these rather than coming out with
new, bright ideas to improve the product.
This would affect the Web’s overall deve-
lopment.
The Web has allowed a much greater flow of
information which some countries are seeking
to regulate and control. How do you react to
this?
I know that some countries are contem-
plating or attempting to control informa-
tion available to individuals on the Intern e t .
My feeling is that it is ve ry difficult to
a c h i e ve because the Internet allows infor-
m ation to flow in many different way s.Yo u
are only a small hole in this vast system. I n
a way, controlling or regulating inform at i o n
is bad for the relationship between a
g ove rnment and the people and, in the
long term,for the stability of the country.
There have also been calls for wides-
pread censorship on the net. But in most of
the Western world, censorship is a deroga-
tory term for one body trying to control
what information another body has access
t o. H owe ve r , there is a gr owing recogni-
tion that parents have the right and the
duty to protect their children from viewing
undesirable sites.This led our Web Consor-
tium to develop systems like the Platform
for Internet Content Selection (PICS) that
enables adults to control children’s access
to different websites.
The large number of filtering software
tools on the market are more effective than
g ove rnment censors h i p.A nat i o n ’s laws can
r e s t rict content only in that country bu t
fil t e rs can block content no matter where it
comes from on the Web. Fundamentally, it
is for the people to determine the type of
social mechanisms and regulations that will
benefit society.
There have been rising concerns over surfers’
privacy. How is this being tackled?
P ri va cy invo l ves the ability of each
CI T IZ EN TIM
In a field churning out dot.com millionaires
e v e ry other week, Tim Berners-Lee stands in a
league apart. The London-born and ra i s e d
B e r n e r s - Lee could easily have become one of the
world’s wealthiest men by commercializing his
invention. Instead, he chose to focus his efforts
on improving and universalizing the We b .
A physics graduate from Oxford University ,
B e r n e r s - Lee started working for the Geneva-
based CERN (European Particle Physics
L a b o ra t o ry) in 1980 where he wrote a
p r o g ramme called E n q u i re that could store and
r e call information based on random associations.
That set the tone for the future development
o f the World Wide Web, which he invented in
l a t e 19 9 0 .
B e r n e r s - Lee wrote the HTML (HyperTe x t
Markup Language) establishing links with other
documents in a computer and designed an
addressing scheme that gave each web page a
unique location, or URL (Universal Resource
Lo cator). Then he developed a set of rules ca l l e d
H TTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) for
t ransferring information across the Net. In 19 91,
he made the programmes freely available for
Internet users across the globe. For the next tw o
years, he continued working on improving the
design of the Web with feedback from Internet
users. 
After leaving CERN in 1994, Berners-Le e
headed for the Massachusetts Institute of
Te c h n o l o gy’s (MIT) Labora t o ry for Computer
Sciences in Boston, where he is director of the
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). The
organization, which is comprised by more than
300 members from the global industry including
giants like Microsoft and IBM, sets technica l
standards for the Web. 
Hailed by T i m e magazine as one of the 10 0
greatest minds of the 20th century, the 45-year-
old Berners-Lee remains a paragon of modesty
despite the astonishing growth and success of his
invention. Sitting in his office at the W3C, he
asserts that the Web is just in its infancy. ‘‘The
ultimate goal is to support and improve our web-
like existence in the world,’’ he says, explaining
that the Web offers an unprecedented means to
achieve greater freedom and social growth. “We
are a still a long way from realizing its full
p o t e n t i a l . ” ■

person to dictate what can and cannot be
done with his or her own personal infor-
m at i o n . For consumers using the Intern e t ,
the gr e atest pri va cy concern is that after
t h e y ’ ve ordered a number of products, c o m-
panies will have accumulated enough per-
sonal inform ation to harm or take adva n t a g e
of them.With consequences ranging from
junk mail to the denial of health insurance,
the problem is serious.
Users should be aware of how various
websites use their personal inform at i o n .I n
a way, p ri va cy concerns are a leading impe-
diment to the further gr owth of We b - b a s e d
c o m m e r c e , but I think sites should highlight
the need for consumer privacy.With these
c o n c e rns in mind, our Consortium has
d e veloped a new tool called P3P (Plat f o rm
for Privacy Preferences Project). It would
a u t o m atically communicate to users a we b-
site’s stated privacy policy and compare it
with the user’s own pre-set policy prefe-
r e n c e s. If a Web site’s pri va cy policy does not
suit the user’s interests,they can stop then
and there.
A responsible website should have a pri-
va cy policy at the bottom of the home page.
Failing that, I believe there ought to be a
legally enforced default policy that offers
individuals the highest protection.The issue
of privacy has been addressed to a certain
extent in Europe where companies have to
keep secure the information they hold on
c u s t o m e rs , and are barred from combining
d atabases in ways that are legal in the
United Stat e s. M a ny people in the U. S .a r e
starting to realize the need for more regu-
lation of privacy and the need for greater
protection of the individual and society.
There has been a spurt of Internet-related
patents in recent years. What effect are these
having on the Web’s development?
The awarding of Intern e t - r e l ated pat e n t s
poses a danger to the We b ’s unive rs a l i t y
and can kill good ideas.There was a widely
held assumption in the We b ’s first five ye a rs
t h at a common good was to be gained from
putting together a far-reaching infrastruc-
t u r e . N ow a huge amount of business is
being done on the We b. The ability to
control any part of it through patent claims
will be very lucrative. In some cases busi-
nesses may be able to gain money simply by
threatening to take legal action.This has a
dampening effect on people working toge-
ther to create a universal Web.
For example, people in the WWW pro-
fession meet often to discuss technological
i m p r ovements and innovat i o n s , f r o m
i m p r oved graphic or video conferencing
systems to ways of wiring the deve l o p i n g
world.These projects have the potential to
b e n e fit many people but are sometimes sud-
denly abandoned because of fears or
ru m o u rs of legal action from a company
h aving patent claims to that technology.
C u rr e n t l y, in the U. S . (unlike in many other
c o u n t ri e s ) , it is possible to patent part of
the way a programme does something.
Some of the recent Intern e t - r e l at e d
p atent awards have been derided by the
Web community. They are effectively res-
tricting the use of technologies that could
expand the use and unive rsality of the
I n t e rn e t . I hope that ve ry soon patents will
only be considered valid if they represent a
real novelty or a really bright idea. I have ye t
to see a patent like this in the field.
There is no way to judge the authenticity or
reliability of information on the Web, making
users highly vulnerable. Is this likely to
change?
We are not using all the technology ava i-
lable to verify the authenticity of a website
or a person you come across. M o r e
a d vanced tools will soon be introduced.
With the help of new brow s e rs and by using
digital signatures, you will soon be able to
actually ensure that the document or the
website you are referring to was in fa c t
g e n e r ated by its claimed author.With regard
Surfing the Web in a Dakar slum is a rare luxury on the African continent, where only 3.5 inhabitants out of 1,000 have access to the Internet, compared with 14.1
in Asia, 88 in Europe, 160.3 in the Americas and 224.5 in Oceania, according to the International Telecommunications Union.

use to access it. If you analyze the recent
v i rus at t a c k s , you’ll find it’s computers ru n-
ning the same software produced by the
same company that are usually coming
under attack by hackers. While it’s advan-
tageous to have many people running the
same software, there is a need for alterna-
tive types of products in order to build up
resistance to virus attacks.
There have been proposals that Internet users
in developed countries be taxed in order to
wire the rest of the world?
I do think that the developed wo r l d
owes a gr e at debt to the developing one
and Internet access adds one line to that
debt. However, it is not obvious whether
taxing all Internet users in general is a smart
idea. It has to be done on a selective basis.
I feel that those who can afford large
amounts of Internet access—those for ins-
tance who are in position to get videos-on-
demand or use the Web extensively for com-
mercial purposes—can be taxed.
One could also argue that introducing a
tax might discourage some countries from
i nvesting in the Intern e t , which is deve l o p i n g
so rapidly right now.The only place where
you could gi ve serious thought to a tax is the
U. S . , and perhaps Finland. Other deve-
loped countri e s ,which are trying to catch up
with the U. S . , m ay be a bit reluctant to
to electronic messages, new and secure
c o m m u n i c ation protocols allow us to make
sure that nobody can sneak in and alter a
message along its way.
Now the question is how do you know
whether a particular document or person
you come across while surfing on the net is
reliable.You just can’t do that.There is no
i n f r a s t ructure set up at the moment by
which you can actually check the reliability
of a person or of a site you are visiting.W hy
should you believe in somebody about
whom you have never heard of? I think
people will have to learn whom they can
trust on the Web.
Take a book for example. You read it
because it was referred to you by reliable
s o u r c e s. In the same way somebody yo u
k n ow may point to a web site.Trust is alway s
t r a n s f e rred from one individual to another.
We have to set up a “Web of trust.”
Some people initially thought of the
Web as an anonymous space separated from
reality in which there was no individual
responsibility.This is not the case.Anyone
who sends a fraudulent message is sitting
somewhere and is naturally subjected to
local laws. If someone makes forged tran-
sactions, the fact that they did it electroni-
cally doesn’t in any way absolve them of
their responsibility under the law.
Thanks to the Web, the world has become a
global village. But we have recently witnessed
a rising incidence of hackers paralyzing public
utility systems with viruses. Can systems
become more resilient?  
While the Internet is a decentralized
s y s t e m , I think the principle danger it fa c e s
now is the lack of diversity in the tools we

No, it wasn’t a love message… Only greater product diversity will build up resistance to virus attacks, says Lee.

c u l t u r e . E ven in European countri e s , i t
was difficult for the Web to get start e d
because you didn’t have a huge monocul-
ture or monolingual audience waiting eve-
ry w h e r e . Getting over this barrier in coun-
tries with smaller linguistic audiences will
be very difficult.
Could you elaborate on the “Semantic Web”
you are working on at the moment?
My dream for the Web has two part s. I n
the first, I see the Web becoming a much
more powerful means for collaborat i o n
among people. In the second, c o l l a b o r a-
tions extend to computers. M a c h i n e s
become capable of analyzing all the data on
the Web — the contents, links and transac-
tions between people and computers.
The Semantic Web would be able to
take inform ation from different databases on
the We b , from catalogues and we ather sites
to stock price inform at i o n , and to allow
this data to be processed by computers. At
the moment, this cannot be done because
the data available on the Web is not in a form
t h at can be understood or conve rted by
c o m p u t e rs for direct analysis. This is
because the Web pages are designed only for
human readership.
The Semantic Web would also answer
many people’s prayers for a logical search
engine that gives you solid results. Right
now, search engines come up with thou-
sands of Web pages in response to a request.
It is impossible to search what ’s in all those
pages. With the Semantic Web, the search
engine would go out and say “Well,here is
an object which I can mat h e m atically prove
to you matches the criteria requested.” In
s h o rt , search engines will become more
meaningful and effective . Once the two -
part dream is achieved, the Web will be a
place where the whim of a human being and
the reasoning of a machine will co-exist in
an ideal, powerful mixture. ■
Interview by Ethirajan Anbarasan
UNESCO Courier journalist
introduce taxation.
It is still difficult to get an Internet connection
in the South because of the lack of telephone
lines.  Are there solutions to this?
Te l e c o m m u n i c ations departments in
m a ny developing countries are still bu r e a u-
c r atic and would never agree to shari n g
a nything with anybody or to allow any com-
petition that would improve access. O n e
option is to rethink the technology altoge-
ther.We should start off by expanding the
use of wireless technologies for basic com-
munications in rural areas. Once networks
h ave been built up, walkie-talkies could
e ventually be merged with the Intern e t
without any input from telecommunica-
tion ministri e s. The system would be a
decentralized one in which there would be
no need to apply for an Internet address or
a domain name. Research is already going
on in this field and I strongly feel that com-
mercial production of this technology
should start soon to expand Internet access
in Southern countries.
H owe ve r , it may be difficult for this
technology to be deployed in some countri e s
because it would threaten the existing
monopoly of telecommunication compa-
nies or government control over commu-
n i c at i o n s.The United Nations could play a
role in spreading the idea among its member
S t ates as this technology offers ve ry exciting
possibilities.
I also think subsidies should be put
t owards translating inform ation on the
I n t e rnet into different languages. It is
i m p o rtant that the Web support local
cultures and not just broadcast American

T HE NET
A ND THE WEB
A s Berners-Lee puts it, the Web could
not exist without the Net. First developed
for military purposes by the U.S. Department
of Defence in the 1960s, the Internet is
a network of networks. It refers to millions
of computers around the world connected
to each other by telephone wire, cable and
satellite. The Web, a part of the Internet,
is a worldwide collection of text and
multimedia files linked to each other via a
system of hypertext documents. The Hypertext
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) was created by
Berners-Lee in 1990 at CERN, the European
Particle Physics Laboratory, as a means of
sharing scientific data internationally, instantly
and inexpensively. With hypertext, a word or
phrase can contain a link to another text.
To achieve this, Berners-Lee developed a
programming language called HTML,
which allows users to easily link to other
pages or network services on the Web. ■
