South Ko re a :
freedom or love?
The advent of democracy in South Korea and efforts to defend local film production against
U.S. competition have spawned a new generation of filmmakers who are winning plaudits at
home and abroad
SOUTH KOREAN JOURNALIST BASED IN PARIS
AND CONSULTANT FOR SEVERAL FILMFESTIVALS
South Ko r e a ’s filmmakers are in a recalci-
trant mood. They are battling the Ame-
rican juggernaut in its effort to lift a local
quota on importing foreign fil m s,but these
militants don’t have their backs to the
w a l l : the general public shares the country’s new cul-
tural exuberance,and is backing its young directors.
“Our young filmmakers are to be congratulated on
the breadth of their imagination and their box-
office successes,” says 58-year-old Lee Doo-yong,
who has made more than 50 fil m s. “ They know
what they want to say.Th a t ’s something new round
here.”
The South Korean film industry is doing extre-
mely well. It conquered 37 per cent of the domestic
market in 1999 (up from 25 per cent the previous
year and 18 per cent in 1997),a total boosted by a
record 6.5 million people who went to see the film
S h i r i ( Titanic only managed a local audience of 4.3
million).
With this windfall,the man who made the film,
Kang Je - g y u , decided to join forces with young fil m-
m a k e r s, revamp the distribution network and lay the
groundwork for cooperation between Asian coun-
tries. New film companies (Sidus, Cinema Service,
Myung Fi l m ,East Fi l m ,Bom) are also zeroing in on
young directors just starting out. Serious money
from the likes of Mirae Esset, U n i k o r e a , CJ Enter-
tainment and National Technology Finance is fil l i n g
the gap left by the big industrial conglomerates,
the chaebol, which pulled out of film fin a n c i n g
during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis.
It was in the midst of the economic downturn
that the United States chose to attack the system of
quotas in place since 1985. The main feature of
t h e s e,one which ensured the industry’s prosperity,
stipulated that Korean films should be shown in
cinemas for between 100 and 146 days a year. But
the reaction from South Korean professionals,
backed by France, stopped the U.S. campaign in its
tracks.
Despite a drop in the number of productions
caused by the economic crisis, 18 films by fir s t - t i m e
directors (out of a total of 43 new films) were made
in 1999 and seven of the year’s 10 most popular
films were debuts. In 1999,22 such first films and 10
second features by new directors were made out of
a total of 53 releases,at an average cost of about $1.5
million each.
The rise of this new cinema dates back to the late
1980s, at the end of years of authoritarian political
rule that began in 1961 with the long dictatorships
of Park Chung-hee and then Chun Doo-hwan. In
the period leading to 1971,the South Korean film
industry had also prospered,turning out some 200
films a year despite the military regime and the dis-
torting effects of the Cold War, which partly para-
lyzed cultural life. Society was by then moderni-
zing at lightning speed, and films mirrored the social
and political ferment that resulted.
Ha Kil-jong’s 1975 film Parade of Fo o l s, a favou-
rite of the new wave, came to symbolize this period.
I MYUNG-HEE

Seom by Ki-duk,one of the leading lights of this new generation.

With a final scene that is still tremendously moving,
the film has become an icon for young directors, i n s-
piring the landmark film of the Korean new wave,
Lee Ja n g - h o ’s Declaration of Fo o l s ( 1 9 8 3 ) . K i l -
j o n g ’s film depicts a nation’s youth that is innocent
and full of dreams but shaken by
the political situation, a youth lon-
ging for freedom and democracy.
“ The entire South Korean film
industry suffered from crippling
c e n s o r s h i p,” Lee Doo-yong says.
“In 1980,in front of my very eyes,
a minor official clipped out half an
h o u r ’s worth of negatives from my
film The Last Eyewitness, which I
was particularly fond of. What an
incredible waste of creative work!
I even considered giving up fil m
altogether.”
After filmmaking restrictions
were lifted in 1985 and script cen-
sorship abolished in 1987,a fresh
new cinema appeared around
1 9 8 8 . Park Kwang-su’s A S i n g l e
Spark (1996) and Jang Sun-woo’s
A Petal (1996), films made by two
veterans of this new wave,m a r k e d
a peak of public interest in libe-
rated political cinema. The two
films dealt with a couple of key
events which had long been taboo:
the banning of the trade union
movement and the massacre at
Kwang-ju in 1980, when 2,000
people died according to witnesses
but only 200 according to the Chun
Doo-hwan regime. Public support
for the films was proof of the new
cinema’s vigour.
The impact of the jointly-made
The Night Before the Strike (1990)
was just as significant for the then
bold and militant independent
c i n e m a .To watch this aesthetically
unimpressive film in the only place
it could be seen, a university
c a m p u s, it was best to wear trai-
ning shoes and know how to run.
On one occasion 1,700 police plus
a helicopter turned up to seize a
copy of the film.In all,a million young people saw
it even though it was officially banned.
The film’s producers and directors, like several
others—such as Lee Eun, Lee Yo n g - b a e, C h a n g
Dong-hong and Jang Yu n - h y u n ,along with the critic
Lee Yong-kwan—advocated links between the fil m
world and the working class.To d a y, they hold impor-
tant posts in bodies such as the KOFIC, set up to
encourage film creativity on the model of France’s
National Film Centre, the CNC.
Sopyonje set off another revolution in 1993 by
drawing many more people to the cinema.Th r o u g h
a melancholy paean to the disappearing art of tra-
ditional singing, veteran director Im Kwon-taek,
who already has 90 films under his belt, took a new
look at the nation’s painful course since the Ja p a n e s e
occupation. This journey through cultural history
sent a shockwave through audiences. More than a
million people went to see it,beating all records and
overshadowing local box office interest in Steven
Spielberg’s Jurassic Park.
The enthusiasm for Korean-made films has
c o n t i n u e d . Cinema audiences keep on growing and
films by first-time directors often draw more than a
million people.But public interest has shifted, w i t h
young people between 17 and 25—who make up the
majority of cinema-goers—becoming the key to
commercial success.
A landmark 
for Korean culture
Yet the film industry’s new vitality,along with the
growing role of big investors, has not helped all
d i r e c t o r s.C h u n h y a n g, Im Kwon-taek’s latest work,
which in 2000 became the first Korean film to be offi-
cially presented at the Cannes festival,was a box-
office flop. The generation of directors aged over
50—Lee Doo-yong, who made L’ A m o u r ( 1 9 9 9 ) ,
and Bae Chang-ho, director of The Heart (1998)—
is having big problems making small-budget inde-
pendent fil m s.Even the granddaddy of the industry,
75-year-old Sin Sang-ok, cannot complete his film
The Vi s i t, the tale of a father who discovers his
daughter working as a bar hostess in Seoul, illus-
trating the conflict between tradition and the thrus-
ting materialism of today.
The times clearly favour young filmmakers ins-
pired by Hollywood formulas and video-game
s c r i p t s, but independent cinema has not given up yet.
Since the arrival of democracy, it has simply changed
its slogans. Instead of “Freedom or death!”it now
p r o c l a i m s, as if in reference to the French surrealist
poet Robert Desnos,“Freedom or love!”
Films made by this school, such as Spring in My
Hometown (1998) by Lee Kwang-mo, Peppermint
C a n d y (1999) by Lee Chang-dong, Christmas in
August (1998) by Huh Jing-ho and The Spy (1999)
by Jang Jin, have spread abroad. The best-known
director among them, Hong Sang-su, who made
The Day the Pig Fell Into the Well in 1996, is opti-
mistic.“I think Korean cinema will stay very inter-
esting for another decade at least,” he says, p o i n t i n g
out that cinema courses in universities draw talented
s t u d e n t s, that many short films are getting shown and
that movie websites are proliferating.“ The cinema
is going to become the main landmark for Korean
culture in all its diversity,” he says.“And that’s exci-
ting.” The release in September of young director
Park Chan-ook’s new film Joint Security A r e a,w i t h
ticket sales of a million in its first three days, shows
that the issue of reconciliation with North Korea has
generated even more powerful subject matter. ■

Neo-realism is a
moral perspective on
the world.
Roberto Rossellini,
Italian film director
(1906-1977)
