The Kazakh film industry was a ship in the night.It raised a few hopes,
but now it’s vanishing.
At the end of the 1980s, cinema was the first cultural activity in Kazakhs-
tan to feel the currents of freedom that Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of per-
estroika had unleashed.A dozen young filmmakers who had trained at
Moscow’s prestigious VGIK film school returned home in 1987,including
Serik A p r i m o v, Darezhan Omirbayev,Amir Karakulov,Talgat Te m e n o v,all of
whom would soon be winning prizes in major film festivals.
The story of the country’s film industry began with Rashid Nugmanov’s
1988 film The Needle, which was a big hit all over the then Soviet Union and
one of the first films to break the taboo of talking about drug addiction.N e x t
came A p r i m o v ’s T e r m i n u s, a  film depicting the absurdity of daily life in a
Kazakh village.
These films set a realist tone, and the works that followed—many of them
autobiographical—claim to follow in the tracks of Fr a n c e ’s “new wa v e.”
With their almost documentary styles and ingenuous touches, these fil m s
gave directors the freedom to say exactly what they felt.
The period after perestroika and then independence in 1991 proved quite
a good time for artists. Government continued to subsidize the film indus-
try and more than 30 private studios sprang up. But most of these have
since disappeared due to a lack of cash.In 1994,Kazakhstan (with its 16
million inhabitants) turned out about a dozen films. By 2000 this had fal-
len to only a handful.
Working conditions are tough, with no laws to encourage private film pro-
d u c t i o n ,old-fashioned studio equipment,virtually non-existent distribution
networks and a public with little money to spend on going to the cinema.
Fi l m m a kers have also lost their prestige.The unity of style and subject of the
early days has gradually faded, and local films were quickly eclipsed by
American imports.
Everyone has adjusted to the new situation in their own way.The luckiest
filmmakers, such as Omirbayev and Aprimov, have found foreign produc-
tion partners—in France and Japan—while others are making advertise-
ments or mortgaging their apartments. ■
CLOÉ DRIEU
RESEARCHERAND ASSISTANT TO DAREZHAN OMIRBAYEV

DON’T BLINK NOW, IT’S KAZAKHSTA N
