Shooting  

The fly-past

 the Bre e z e
“ I take pictures of everything— 
of my family and especially my friends.
It’s pure pleasure.”

You gotta be niii-ce to the reporter!”says 19-year-old Romain,who likes to
make his friends laugh.And he knows all about what behind a good image.
He and all the enthused amateur photographers at the Balalaika workshop
in the suburb of Bourtzwiller,outside Mulhouse (see box p.8 ) , are ready, e v e n
eager to answer “the reporter’s ”q u e s t i o n s.They seem happy to talk, to be lis-
tened to,to show off their work.Th e y ’re pleased to be known and appreciated.
About 40 per cent of this suburb’s 15,000 inhabitants vote for the extreme
right-wing National Front and these youngsters,mostly of North African origin,
voice in words the very things they strive to show in their pictures.
“They have a quiet attitude to life,” says Eric Vazzoler, the photogra-
pher who runs the workshop.“They rarely take pictures of burnt-out cars.”
The youths insist photography hasn’t “ s a v e d ”them from a so-called “ s o r d i d
u n i v e r s e,” as some articles have claimed.But everyone has found something
in it to match their needs. It has given them pleasure and self-confid e n c e,a n d
they have stopped being afraid of what other people think. It has also
opened up a new social and cultural horizon,a new world of imagination.
Like many youths, those in Mulhouse are anxious to meet people and
have new experiences.But they are also hesitant, torn between family ties and
the call of the outside world,between love of photography, which requires
devotion and time, and love itself, which takes them elsewhere. Here is a
sample of their thoughts.
Samir, 16,training in car maintenance:
“ I ’ve been taking photos for two years now. I take pictures of every-
thing—of my family and especially my friends. I t ’s pure pleasure.Once you’v e
done photography yourself, you don’t see other people’s photos in the same
way any more.You look at them more carefully and search for a message.”
Cub photographers from immigrant backgrounds 
take an unusually candid look at their troubled
neighbourhood on the outskirts of the French city 
of Mulhouse
PHOTOS BY THE BALALAIKA WORKSHOP,
TEXT BY SOPHIE BOUKHARI
PHOTOS BY JAMEL BÉRIBÈCHE, MORAD BOUKHEMERRA, SAMIA CHIBOUT,
JOËL DIORFLAR, MESTÛRE GÜLER, NADYA KREITE.
SOPHIE BOUKHARI IS A Unesco Courier JOURNALIST.

Shooting the Bre e z e
Who minds anyway?

“You don’t need to be saved just because you
live in a poor neighbourhood.”
After prayers during the Eid festival

Samia, 22,studying management:
“ With Eric,we do printing and developing.Yo u ’ve got to be serious and
learn how to do it. We’ve seen how we can do it all ourselves and on top of
that our work’s getting recognized.
The articles they’ve written about us say that ‘thanks to photography,
t h e y ’ve got themselves out of a rut.’ Th a t ’s not true.Anyone can come to the
workshop but not everybody does.You don’t need to be saved just because
you live in a poor neighbourhood.One paper said burnt-out cars were part
of our daily lives,but that’s not true either.They’re interested in us because
we live in a place like this. People say:‘Look at where they come from and
yet they still manage to take photos.’ Or else it’s:‘That’s how those neigh-
bourhoods are!’ So they’re either trying to see through our eyes or else they
think we’ve been saved.
Through taking photos I’ve made new friends. Before, I would never
have gone to an exhibition.Nowadays, I walk in, look and talk with people
from different social backgrounds.
Once a photographer rang me from Germany to buy one of my pictures.
I was proud. My parents were too and told everyone about it. Eventually I’d
like to have my own photo lab if I have the money. But I don’t want to be a
professional photographer. It’s too hard.”
Nagi, 26,works with a maintenance company:
“I came here from Tunisia four years ago and I didn’t have any friends.
I ’d already done a little photography in Tu n i s i a ,and I kept it up.I t ’s helped me
to find out how people live here and to meet people. I like the atmosphere of
the photo lab even though there are some tricky moments with Eric.S o m e t i m e s
I don’t like what he says.But it’s taught me I have my faults,that I’m stubborn.”
Rap group La Baze in concert

B a l a l a i k a ’s Photogra p h e rs
One day, art photographer Eric Vazzoler decided that he’d had enough traipsing
around Paris trying to sell his work, mainly about the former Soviet Union. So he
agreed to take charge of a “neighbourhood cultural project”in the northern suburb
of Mulhouse, in eastern France, and not surprisingly, gave his workshop a Russian
name. Projects like these were started by the Ministry of Culture in 1996 to try to
“reduce social divisions.”
“I was going to stay seven months, but I’ve been here nearly four years now,”says Eric,
3 7 .H e ’s about to move on, but his project has lasted longer than all the others and
been much praised.There have been exhibitions in France and other countries,g e n e r o u s
press coverage and a book soon to be published.
The youngsters credit Eric with its success.“He isn’t easy and he’s demanding to work
with,but what a pro!”they say. “We can always knock on his door at 11 o’clock at
night to get a roll of film.”
E r i c ,who lives in the neighbourhood, is more modest.“When I arrived here, there wa s
n o t h i n g . I filled a gap,and I have the cream of the crop.The really disturbed kids can’t
take the studious atmosphere of the lab.” And in his gruff but kindly way, he adds:
“Their pictures are very nicely composed.They’ve got a distinct style. They’re refre-
shing and generous. At their age I was busy copying the great masters. These kids
aren’t influenced by anyone.” Except by Eric,of course. ■
Kamel, 19,training to service machinery and computers:
“I’ve loved everything to do with pictures since I was little, when I
dreamt of being a film producer.The photo workshop has been a godsend.
Especially when I found out it only cost $5 a year to join.
P h o t o g r a p h y ’s classy.When you do it, you meet different people, f r o m
other social classes. The lab is also fun. We have a really good time there.
B e f o r e, when I looked at a photo, it didn’t mean anything to me. Now I know
how to criticize my own photos and other people’s. I ’ve learned how to
defend my perspective and my work.We don’t get much chance to exhibit
what we do, but we can help to change the image of young people.
When I tell people I take pictures, e v e r y o n e ’s amazed. Hip-hop is
seen as normal,but photography surprises people.They think this must be
a good guy and they’re less afraid of me.
Once, I was stopped going into a nightclub. My face must not be the
right shade of colour. I got out my camera and as soon as they saw I’d come
to take pictures for free, they opened the door. Another time, I worked for
someone who did body-painting. I was paid for it and I felt recognized.
As soon as there’s a project, I’m interested. I can see myself doing it for
a living but not as a photo-journalist or a portrait photographer. I’d like to
be an artistic photographer.Yo u ’re freer. My goal is to develop my own style
and make a name for myself.”
Sandrine, 18,training in commercial management:
“At last I have a passion.B e f o r e, I wasn’t doing much of anything. I was
pretty self-absorbed. Now I have friends.The hardest part is to accept the
criticism of Eric and the others, because I’m personally attached to the
photos I take. For a while, I even stopped taking them.Then I started again.
I got a bit of self-confidence.”
Jamel, 24,studying at the Mulhouse art school:
“I’m the one who does all the graffiti art in the neighbourhood. I go by
the name ‘Serio’ because S, E and R are the letters I draw best and also
because they remind me of the word ‘ s e r i o u s.’ I started out wanting to study
music but the equipment’s expensive. So I got into painting. I’ll need pho-
tography at least until the end of my time at art school. I’m interested in
images. I think about them all the time.” ■
Neighbourhood games  
Three colours

My brother reads the Koran
Taking a shower
