but wherever they went, presented them-
selves as craftspeople, artists and traders.
They were independent workers,commit-
ted to being masters of their own time,
intent on making an earning from odd,
on-the-spot jobs and with enough skills to
meet the requests and needs of a disper-
sed clientele.
Many Europeans no doubt frowned
upon the Gypsies’ working habits: how
they sought out jobs each day, their trust
in luck, their spontaneous way of approa-
ching strangers and their persistence. It
set them apart from farming communities
who worked for the long term, in tune
with the changing seasons. Despite this
and the inevitable friction between people
from different backgrounds, nomads and
farmers needed each other. The nomads
provided 
tools, baskets, veterinary care, music or
temporary manpower to the farmers, who
g ave them food and other goods in
exchange.
For a long time, the Roma managed
to make a living in this way, mainly as iti-
nerants but also by staying in one place
when there were opport u n i t i e s. T h e r e
were plenty of such cases in the Ottoman
Empire and in central Europe, where the
Roma served in the armies of invaders.
They were also active in the Iberi a n
peninsula, where they took over from the
Moors and Jews expelled towards the end
of the 15th century, at the time of the
Reconquista, until they too were forced
out.
These few examples go to show that
Gypsies were not excluded because of a
deep-rooted failure to adjust to local 
economic conditions, as it is too often
suggested. Rather, it seems clear that
governments and officials—first in wes-
tern Europe,especially Spain, and then in
central and eastern Europe—have, over
the centuries, gone to great lengths to
portray the Roma as a foreign and anti-
social people without a culture of their
own.
■
The figures are shocking. B e t ween 60
and 80 per cent of Hungary ’s wo r k i n g -
age Roma are estimated to be unem-
p l oye d . More than 60 per cent of Romania’s
Gypsies are said to live below the pove rt y
line and 80 per cent have no formal quali-
fic at i o n s. In Bulgari a , the same percentage
of Gypsies living in cities are jobless.T h e
figures are believed to be much higher in
the countryside.
In some villages of southern and eas-
tern Slovakia, all Roma of adult age are
destitute. In Britain, an estimated 10 to
20 per cent of the “travellers,” as they are
called, live in absolute poverty. In some
French cities, between 70 and 80 per cent
of the Gypsy population are on welfare
payments paid out to the most destitute.
Their housing conditions are appal-
ling, while their bill of health is another
cause for concern: most Roma have a life
expectancy of under 50.
Valued skills and masters 
of their own time
A glaring gap separates Europe’s
peoples from the continent’s largest
minority. Why, despite repeated attempts
to assimilate or exclude the Gypsies over
the past 600 years, have they remained
cut off from other peoples and for the
most part, pushed to the fringes of socie-
ty? After all, not every group of people
who came to live in Europe has been sys-
tematically ostracised. The Hungarians
were a nomadic people of Asian origin
but they managed to become a nation.
And there are others.
Probably not all the Roma—who first
came from India—were nomads when
they arrived in the Byzantine Empire in
the 12th or 13th century. But as far as we
can tell from various writings, they had
talents that enabled them to participate in
the economies of the regions they cros-
sed. They had no ambitions to conquer,



G Y PSIES: TRA PPED ON
T HE FRINGES OF EUROPE
◗ Alain Reyniers
Across Europe, Gypsies live in dire poverty and are frequently the target of violence 
and racism. But some governments are finally taking notice of the continent’s largest minority
◗ Ethnologist, lecturer at the Catholic University of
Louvain and editor of the magazine Études Tsiganes.
A Gypsy camp in Trent, in northern Italy.

The contrived image of the Gypsies as
an idle, roaming and dangerous people
was one of the devices—along with vio-
lence, coercion and ideology—that was
used to help forge the national identity of
peoples belonging to specific territories
with well-guarded borders. In the 19th
c e n t u ry, when these peoples rose up
against foreign ru l e rs , the nat i o n a l i s t
struggle was always on behalf of a single
majority people, whose sturdy peasant
values were often played up, to the detri-
ment of all other elements in society,
including the Roma.
The influence of this past on forging a
common identity as an excluded people
cannot be underestimated. The nomads
of the A u s t r o - H u n g a rian Empire, f o r
example, settled in the 18th century as
“new peasants,” but were not given any
land. It contributed to a culture of mis-
trust and resistance towards gadjes (non-
Gypsies).
Even though the Gypsies had been the
long-time economic and cultural partners
of European peoples, they were always
kept out of political decision-making,
though it can be questioned whether they
were interested in becoming involved at
this level. At best they were regarded as
juniors to be dominated, at worst trouble-
makers to be pushed aside. Some closed
off from the world and scratched a living
on the edge of gadjo society, while others
took another path, making contact with
non-Gypsies as best they could.
In the process,some collective traits of
the Roma—wariness of the outside world,
the tendency to mix with one’s own and a
fatalistic attitude towards events—beca-
me accentuated and encouraged their
separation from other peoples.
Mutual distrust
Children were understandably taught
to be weary of the gadjes. Their education
was geared at following in their parent’s
footsteps and focused on the practical,

with their environment serving as the
starting point for learning.
The tendency to exclude Gypsies
grew steadily throughout the 20th centu-
ry. Police in we s t e rn Europe cracked
down on them with increasing harshness.
These days, Gypsies are confined to a
limited number of parking plots and cam-
ping grounds that are often ill-equipped
for the needs of travelling families.
The gr owth of market forces and
changes in consumer tastes, along with
n e we r , more sophisticated production
m e t h o d s , h ave helped to dri ve some
Gypsy communities deeper into poverty.
Their trading practices are restricted by
laws against selling door-to-door, against
street activities and against recuperating
objects from dumps. Such legi s l at i o n
takes absolutely no account of their skills,
nor of the stakes at hand for Roma in this
domain. If they had no access to social
assistance or credit (although the public
image of Roma is hardly conducive to res-
pect),many would find themselves in des-
perate situations.
Targets of violence 
in eastern Europe
Under communism in central and
eastern Europe, Roma were first seen as a
social aberration, a relic of the “bour-
geois” world that would eventually disap-
pear. The Gypsies were shipped en masse
to work in menial jobs on collective farms
and in state enterprises. The lack of poli-
tical attention to the Roma’s culture—
their ancestral language, their education
geared to sharing and their economic
flexibility stressing income from odd
jobs—and the crying indifference to the
xenophobia that developed towards them,
did not facilitate the assimilation of young
Gypsies into the socialist societies.
The collapse of communism in eas-
tern Europe brought great suffering and
violence to the Roma, whose neighbou-
rhoods have been repeatedly attacked by
skinheads and others. In Bosnia and more
recently in Kosovo, Gypsy communities
were even destroye d . U n e m p l oy m e n t
among them has further increased.
In a sense, this new marginalisation,
which has produced emigration move-
ments towards a utopian El Dorado
(namely western Europe), is simply ano-
ther consequence of the political and
nationalist attitudes that have harmed the
Gypsies time and time again in the past.
Gypsies often have little lifeline outside
their communities, which are refused any
territorial rights by the host societies.
They are often prevented from settling in
a region that seems more hospitable
because they are ill-equipped to cope with
the demands of today’s economy and lack
a decent level of education.
Recognizing
national minorities
The Roma have nonetheless made a
few significant strides in recent years.
Several international bodies and many
NGOs have taken up their cause and have
pushed programmes to foster their inte-
gration—both economically and socially.
Governments are finally recognizing them
as national minorities or are taking mea-
sures to encourage their development in
the longer term.
Not all Roma have had their spirit
broken by centuries of being shunned.
Some have adapted, occasionally by assi-
milating but more often by highlighting
their traditional know-how and showing a
willingness to become involved in the host
society.
The future of the Roma probably does
not depend on a single solution. Given
the problems and obstacles they face, it is
more than ever linked to a collective
determination to build a humane and
democratic society where individuals and
groups can blossom and flourish. ■

