In my view, b i o d i ve rs i t y ’s fundamental value is
neither aesthetic nor economic but env i r o n-
m e n t a l , e ven though most people are largely
u n aware of this.The value of biodive rsity is often
measured in terms of the number of species
living in a gi ven area. But the interactions bet-
ween the many species in an ecosystem, and bet-
ween them and the env i r o n m e n t ’s physical and
chemical components are also ve ry import a n t .
This highly intri c ate web of relationships makes
an ecosystem more valuable than the sum of the
species it contains.
Ecosystems perform services that are essential
for the survival of the human species. They fix
carbon in the atmosphere and produce oxygen,
protect soil from erosion and keep it fertile, filter
water and replenish aquifers, provide pollination
and anti-parasite agents and so on.
The first two of these services are closely rela-
ted to each other. They result from photosynthe-
sis, whereby green plants, starting with algae,
absorb carbon dioxide (CO2) and emit oxygen.
For millions of years, the balance between the
various gases in the atmosphere remained stable.
But with the coming of the industrial revolution,
humans began burning increasing amounts of
fossil fuels. Today, three billion tonnes of carbon
build up in the atmosphere each year, and natural
ecosystems can no longer absorb all these emis-
sions—especially since they are disappearing at
an alarming rate. Deforestation alone releases
such tremendous amounts of CO2 and other
gases, such as methane, that it has become the
second-leading cause of global warming.
Storing freshwater, protecting soil and kee-
ping it fertile are three other closely related func-
tions. Ecosystems are veritable “freshwater facto-
ries”. They absorb rainwater and slowly filter it
through the soil before draining it towa r d s
streams, rivers, lakes and underground aquifers
that supply us with the precious liquid.When the
vegetal ground cover is degraded, the water cycle
is disrupted. Rain strikes the bare earth, washing
away huge amounts of nutritional substances.
Reservoirs, lakes and rivers silt up and terrible
mudslides, such as those that recently ripped



E c o s y s t e m s, our u n k n o w n
p ro t e c t o rs
◗ José Sarukhán
How ecosystems work and what part they play in biodiversity remain a mystery.
But we do know that they perform a host of invaluable services for the human species
◗ Director of the Ecology Institute
at the University of Mexico City,
president of Diversitas, an
international biodiversity
programme sponsored by UNESCO
and the International Council for
Science 
Nickel mining in New Caledonia has severely eroded the upper parts of certain massifs and has had a devastating impact
on the environment.

through Central A m e ri c a , Mexico and
Mozambique, kill thousands of people and cause
incalculable damage.
Uncertain reaction 
to climate change
Despite years of research, scientists still know
very little about how ecosystems work. We are
generally incapable of predicting how they will
react to certain transformations in the environ-
ment, especially climate changes. Nor do we
know any more about whether a species present
in a given environment is superfluous or “repla-
ceable”,even when it is very rare. Likewise, we do
not know which key species are indispensable to
maintaining an ecosystem, with a few exceptions
such as pine forests, where that tree is obviously
the dominant species.
We know even less about the part biologi c a l
d i ve rsity itself plays in maintaining ecosystems and
the services they perform . One simple example is a
highly dive rs i fied forest that absorbs carbon diox i-
de—a vital function, as we have seen, for limiting
global wa rm i n g . Suppose the forest is cleared to
make way for a single-crop forest. The service will
still be perform e d , perhaps even better at firs t
because yo u n g, fa s t - gr owing trees absorb more
C O2 than old ones, which regenerate slow l y. B u t
w h at will happen in the long term? After seve r a l
d e c a d e s , the consequences of the loss of biodive r-
sity will probably be felt. Replacing many species
with a single one will have certainly depleted the
soil and, in the long term , s l owed down the forest’s
gr owth and consequently its ability to absorb CO2.
More generally, diversified ecosystems seem
more productive. Specialists remain wary about
their conclusions, but today they believe that bio-
diversity helps ecosystems to resist alien species
and diseases and to recover faster in the event of
disruption. In the face of doubt, and to find out
more about them, it is better to preserve as many
different ecosystems as possible.
A costly lesson 
for New York City
Most people take it for granted that ecosys-
tems will carry on performing services without
receiving anything in return. They think nature
will continue benefiting humanity, no matter how
much damage is done.The survival of organisms
other than our own species is perceived as a frill
that future generations can live without.
These preconceived ideas are wrong and dan-
g e r o u s , as the city of New York has recently come
to realize.The city’s water has always enjoyed such
a good reputation that it was sold throughout the
n o rt h e a s t e rn United Stat e s. Its quality was due to
the Catskill Mountains’ n atural puri fic ation sys-
t e m . But that ecosystem has suffered so much from
p o l l u t i o n , especially fertilizer run-off from fa rm s ,
t h at by the late 1990s New Yo r k ’s water had beco-
me undri n k a b l e . The city planned to build a puri-
fic ation plant, whose cost was put at between six
and eight billion dollars , not including the $300
million in yearly operating costs—an astronomical
bill for a service that had always been free! T h e
p rice was so staggering that the city eve n t u a l l y
decided to restore the Catskill Mountains’ d e gr a-
ded environment at a cost of only one billion dol-
l a rs.
This story clearly illustrates where our interests
l i e . We must preserve ecosystems and the condi-
tions that enable our planet to ensure the surv i va l
of Homo sapiens o r , at least, the short - t e rm mainte-
nance of our current quality of life. ■

