attempt to misrepresent it. Sarajevo, a
multi-ethnic, multicultural city sacrificed
to horror, has come to symbolize the
memory of this murderous century.
In Le Sommeil du monstre (“The Sleeping
Monster”), an animated film based on the war
in Sarajevo that you wrote and drew, you
flash forward to 2026 to observe today’s
world. Why did you use this technique?
I t ’s ve ry odd, but when I depict a bru-
tal scene, I feel deeply uneasy if I set it in
the present. If I situate it 20 or 30 ye a rs
l at e r , h owe ve r , I enjoy the creat i ve process.
The horrible pictures from A f rica and
C h e c h nya that you see eve rywhere in the
media bring us inform ation (I wo n ’t get
i nvo l ved in the debate about its quality) in

ENKI BILA L :
A JOURNEY TO THE END
OF TIME
In comics, books and movies, a Yugoslav-born French artist visits the future to put the past 
in perspective and wields humour as a weapon against horror
Memory is a recurrent theme in your work
and the leitmotif of your latest book, co-
written with the French novelist Dan Franck.
Its title is Un siècle d’amour—a century of
love—but it’s really about a century of terror.
The creat i ve process is based on
m e m o ry. A rtists are a compound of
memory and sensibility. How could they
talk about humanity and the wo r l d
without delving into history and drawing
on memory—their own and the memory
of society and of nature? Memory can be
more or less prominent in an artist’s
work. But even when it’s scarcely percep-
tible, it’s always the raw material of art.
How do you differentiate between history and
memory?
L e t ’s take the case of Un siècle
d’amour. It isn’t a book about history,
even though it starts in 1914, ends in
1999 and moves from Guernica to the
H o l o c a u s t , Hiroshima and events in
Africa—fairly classic chapters of history.
Each episode evokes the experiences of a
woman caught up in the torment of war.
Dan wrote the stories of these 13 wit-
nesses, victims and heroines of our times.
I painted their portraits. But the book is
not very accurate historically. It starts in
Sarajevo 1914 and ends in Saravejo 1999
and not—as respect for chronology would
have required—with events in Kosovo,
decisive though these were for this book.
Readers should see this as a deliberate act
of infidelity to history rather than an
The Egyptian god Horus in the Paris metro in 2003.

A PROL IFIC ART IS T
wa s. T h at ’s the world we grew up in. We
were shaped in its mould.T h e n , all of a sud-
den,everything fell apart.The change was
so swift and so abrupt that it took us una-
wares. Our minds weren’t ready for it.The
war in Yugoslavia proves the point. It was
almost a nineteenth-century wa r. It wa s
a r c h a i c.And “ a r c h a i c i s t s ” are the ones who
caused it.

real time. Such images come to us via two
vehicles of reality, p h o t o gr a p hy and repor-
t i n g . They are part of a language that is
quite different from the art i s t ’s.
So there is a feeling of personal unea-
siness as well as a desire to step back from
reality, to be disconnected from it. But
this doesn’t keep me from returning to
the real world. I visit the future to come
back to the past and the present.
These three dimensions of time often overlap
in your books. The first scene in Le Sommeil
du monstre, for example, takes place in an old
New York yellow cab transformed into a flying
machine. This kind of contemporary detail
ensures that readers don’t feel totally
immersed in a science fiction world.
I don’t want them to be.What’s more,
I find the term science fiction slightly irri-
tating. I am against all kinds of labels,
codifications and classifications in litera-
ture. I don’t think there’s a hard-and-fast
boundary between the worlds of Jules
Verne, George Orwell and H.P. Lovecraft
and those of Baudelaire, Kafka and Poe. I
think the boundaries between genres are
fading away. More and more authors are
weaving the future into their works, whe-
ther they are writing novels or philosophy.
That said, I have loved science fiction
since I was a teenager. Science fiction
enabled me to observe the world in its
cosmic dimension, to have a global vision
of the Earth which influences the ques-
tions I ask about the existence of other life
forms and about the human condition.
What worries you most about today’s world?
Without falling into the trap of “knee-
jerk ecology”, I must say that I am afraid for
our planet. It is becoming weaker all the
t i m e . I have a sense of terrible wa s t e . We
have taken too much out of the Earth, we
h ave heedlessly consumed its resources and
caused irreparable harm.
Religious fundamentalism also alarms
m e .I m a gine “ Ta l i b a n i s m ”on a world scale!
I t ’s terri f y i n g . R e l i gion can become ve ry
d a n g e r o u s , especially if it develops into a

sect mentality.All kinds of excesses are on
the cards in this rapidly changing wo r l d
which doesn’t have much idea about where
i t ’s going. I t ’s both exciting and fri g h t e n i n g
not to know what the future holds in store.
Twenty ye a rs ago, when the world was divi-
ded into two camps,e ve rything was simple,
almost simplistic. Our side was good, the
other was evil.We knew where the enemy
Religion can become very
dangerous, especially if it
develops into a sect
mentality. All kinds of
excesses are on the cards in
this rapidly changing world
which doesn’t have much idea
about where it’s going

Nike, the main hero of Le Sommeil du
monstre, battles the “Obscurantis Order”, 
a kind of sect headed by “three new, 
self-proclaimed charismatic leaders”. 
Is that a veiled allusion to 
the three leaders who brought 
about the break-up of Yugoslavia, 
Serbia’s Milosevic, Croatia’s Tudjman and
Bosnia’s Izetbegovic?
The idea for the “Obscurantis Order”
arose from fundamentalism, but readers
are free to make their own interp r e t at i o n s.
T h at ’s the point of the book: e ve ryone can
make of it what they will. T h e r e ’s nothing
to stop people making a connection with
the three war leaders you mentioned, w h o
were fully tolerated and cynically accepted
by Europe. Better things could have been
d o n e . Europe should have intervened as
soon as the rise of nationalism began in
1 9 8 7 . Not necessarily militarily—a carr o t -
and-stick approach could have been used
by say i n g, “ H e y, Europe is under constru c-
t i o n , d o n ’t miss the boat .” At that time,
Yu g o s l avia was better placed than any
other East European country to join the
European Union.
How did you feel about the war that ravaged
the country where you were born?
It hit me like a smack in the face. I’ve
lived in France since 1960, but I was born
in Belgr a d e . My father was from
Herzegovina and my mother came from
Czechoslovakia at the age of two. I spent
the first nine ye a rs of my life in
Yugoslavia. I was born a Yugoslav or, if
you like, a “Yugoslovak”—that’s what I
was called by Alain Resnais, the director
of La vie est un roman, a film for which I
designed the sets.
I loved that country. Split, Dubrovnik,
Sarajevo, Belgrade. I went back as soon as
I could,even though it was to relive child-
hood memories more than anything else.
Then I was sucked into the terrible reali-
ty of the war. But at the same time, I
remained on the outside. A good thirty
years had gone by since I left, I was an
observer, above the fray, I didn’t take any
strong positions.
It was painful. I felt as if I was caught
in the grip of this history, yet at the same
time I tried to stay detached in order to
understand what was going on. I’m not
sure I succeeded. Some situations are
i rr at i o n a l . I saw French intellectuals
taking positions that sometimes seemed
grotesque. I mistrusted these opinions,
even if their basis was sound, even if they
reflected a kind of generosity.
In short, it was a very hard time, but
obviously nowhere near as hard as it was
for the people on the spot. I experienced
and exorcised my anxiety in my own way,
with Le Sommeil du monstre .
The world of that comic book is sombre and
dominated by cold colours. But humour keeps
on breaking through, even at the most tragic
moments. For example, you write, “A rocket
slammed through a wing of the hospital,
causing three casualties, including an innocent
Sony television set that was switched off”.
That is part of the inexplicable rela-
tionship between the author and his work.
I need humour, of course. It defuses cer-
tain situations. It adds a light touch to
stories that would otherwise be utterly
turgid.
On the opening page of La Foire aux
immortels, you quote this passage from the
writings of Choublanc, the Fascist governor of
Paris in 2023: “Immortality is a form of
dictatorship of life over death. As a dictator,
and someone who is alive, all that’s left for
me is to become immortal. And I will! Even if I
die in the process!”
That is a completely way-out comic
book in which Egyptian gods play the
game Monopoly in a flying pyramid that
has run out of fuel and hovers over Paris.
In it I describe the quest for immortality
in its most ludicrous forms. Choublanc,
who believes memory and history are
An old yellow cab flies over New York in the year 2026.

outdated concepts, will do anything in his
power to achieve immortality. At the same
time, Alcide Nikopol, a deserter launched
into outer space in a flying refrigerator in
1992, falls out of the sky deep-frozen!
This wretched mortal is rescued by the
god Horus, who wants to use his body to
settle his scores with the other Egyptian
deities. Thirty years have gone by. Paris
has changed a lot. Alcide is totally lost.
His memory gradually comes back and,
with it, Baudelaire’s poems, which he
recites all through the events that take
place.The first one describes death at its
most repellent.
I don’t like death. I’m terrified of it
and I’m always thinking about it in a
s o m e w h at abstract way. I ’ ve come to
terms with it as best I can. We might as
well laugh about it, don’t you think?
The monstrous dictator’s name is Choublanc,
which means a loser in French. Is that because
he is doomed to fail? Is there any symbolism
in the names you give your characters?
It’s very odd. Both names and titles
come to me automatically. I don’t know
how it happens or where they come from.
But I do know that I’m incapable of wri-
ting a book or making a film without kno-
wing the title beforehand. It comes out of
the blue. There’s nothing premeditated
about it. When I started the story about
Choublanc, I didn’t even know how it was
going to develop. I already have the title of
my next book, which is a follow-up to Le
Sommeil du monstre. It’s 32 décembre—
“December 32”. When I started writing
32 décembre, I didn’t even known what the
expression meant. Now, one of the book’s
aims is to find a meaning for its title.
Why did you name the head of the
“Obscurantis Order” Warhole? Your female
characters, painted in a dominant colour, owe
something to Andy Warhol.
There’s a pun in Warhole. There’s a
gaping hole over Nike’s head in the hospital
at Sarajevo. But it’s also a deliberate allusion
to Andy Wa r h o l .Names can harbour a host of
m e a n i n g s. In the next book, you’ll see that
Warhole is also an art i s t .An artist of supreme
e v i l . He has decided to turn evil into an art -
form. His geopolitical strategy in the first
book will be replaced by an artistic strat e g y.
You often name your characters after real
people. Nike’s last name is Hatzfeld, a
journalist with the French daily L i b é r a t i o n w h o
was seriously wounded in Sarajevo in 1992. In
Froid Equateur, you allude to the Albanian-
born choreographer Angelin Preljoca j .
To me, news is the raw material for
any projection into the future. I soak up
news, and my story, which is set in the
future, is packed with events from the
present. And if my readers don’t follow
current political events, they are some-
times likely to get lost.
Anjelin is a rather special case. Froid
“An artist needs to stand outside his time.”
© Enki Bilal, Le Sommeil du Monstre, Les Humanoïdes Associés SA/Geneva, 1998

Palace Hotel and Tykho Moon. Does film-
making involve more constraints than creating
comic strips?
The two activities are worlds apart .
Cinema is nothing but constraints. W h e n
you create a comic book, you don’t have to
think about production costs, s h o o t i n g
l o c at i o n s , equipment and actors.
E ve rything depends on the author, who is
e x t r a o r d i n a rily free. But inherent in that
freedom is the danger of going off the rails.
I l l u s t r at o rs have to harness their freedom
all the time, keep it under control.
But the film industry is changi n g . N e w
tools such as small digital cameras are
enabling younger directors to make mov i e s
with low budgets and, a b ove all, e n j oy
gr e ater freedom than their predecessors. I
think we ’re heading towards a bipolari z a-
tion in cinema. On the one hand spectacu-
lar blockbu s t e rs , on the other a small-scale,
almost underground cinema that is bound
to be ve ry interesting.
How does the world of your comic strips
relate to that of your films?
It’s the same world, the same preoccu-
pations, the same atmosphere. I’ve been
criticized for making “comic strip” films.
That’s completely ridiculous. What on
earth is a “comic strip” film? This false
perception may explain why my films
haven’t really been successful in France.
In Japan, on the other hand, they met
with exceptional acclaim, just like my
books.
The comic strip had a chequered career before
it achieved recognition as the ninth art. Are
comic strip artists well thought of in the world
of the arts?
Personally, I am in a very fortunate
position.I get a lot of media attention,too
much sometimes. I have to be careful.But
in some quarters I still feel there is a cer-
tain contempt for graphic art in general.
In some literary, publishing and even
cinema circles, people still think words
are on a higher plane than pictures.
All the same, in 1992 the editors of the French
literary magazine Lire chose Froid Equateur as
their “book of the year”.
The choice was very badly received
both in the literary world and the comic
strip world.The press didn’t talk about it.
It was pretty funny.
I t ’s odd, but the art world denigr at e s
i l l u s t r ation and comic stri p s. A year ago,
the French magazine B e a u x - A rt s p u b l i s h e d
some stories about the comic strip festival
held in the southwe s t e rn city of A n g o u-
l ê m e . The lead article kicked off by wa r-
ning readers that just because the editors
were publishing a special section about
comic strips it didn’t necessarily mean they
considered them to be art.
Not long before, B e a u x - A rt s had publi-
shed a five-page piece about me.And now all
of a sudden it was as if they regretted it.T h e y
d i d n ’t want to turn off their old subscri b e rs.
But at the same time, they wanted to at t r a c t
younger readers.This is a pretty dishonest
a p p r o a c h .But I’m hopeful.I think the people
who think this way are, f o rt u n at e l y, d o o m e d
either to disappear or to change. ■
Interview by Jasmina Sopova,

Equateur came out in 1992. Two years
later,I designed the sets and costumes for
his Romeo and Juliet. It was an exceptional
and exciting encounter on two counts.
W i d e - e ye d , I discovered the world of
dance, which until then had been pretty
much a closed book to me. At the same
time I came to know a gifted artist who
has since become a friend.
Doesn’t the fact that both of you are from the
Balkans explain Romeo and Juliet’s success?
Of course it does.We have a shared Bal-
kan sensibility. I was immediately won ove r
by the way Anjelin wanted to stage R o m e o
and Juliet—his radical approach, the social
setting of a drama that takes on political and
e ven ethnic ove rt o n e s. It was a deeply ful-
filling experience which gave me an oppor-
tunity to serve not only the wo r l d ’s most
beautiful love story but also an artist who
uses dancers ’ bodies to externalize his ideas.
For an illustrat o r ,i t ’s fa s c i n ating to see how
bodies express themselve s.
The heroine in your book The Woman Trap is
called Jill Bioskop. Her last name means
“cinema” in Serb. Froid Equateur begins and
ends with scenes of a movie being made. Are
you a film buff?
Movies have stimulated my imagina-
tion ever since I was a child.When I was
a teenager, I was fascinated by an art form
which I felt was both close to and parallel
to what I dreamed of doing. Cinema held
an extraordinary attraction, but at the
same time it seemed inaccessible. So I
started drawing , which for me was a way
of making movies freely, alone at home.
Later, you directed two fiction films, Bunker
