I n d i a : b u rsting 
at the linguistic seams
◗ Amitav Choudhry
India is one of the world’s leading multilingual countries, but today many of its minority
languages are facing extinction as majority languages gain gro u n d
In d i a , with a population of around one billion
people, is often regarded as a model of harmo-
nious linguistic coexistence within a single stat e .
It has two official languages (Hindi and English), 1 8
major languages Scheduled in the Indian Consti-
t u t i o n , and 418 “ l i s t e d ”l a n g u a g e s , each spoken by
10,000 people or more. All-India Radio broadcasts
in 24 languages and in 146 dialects; n e w s p a p e rs
are published in at least 34 languages; 67 languages
are used in primary education, and 80 in literacy
work.The constitution guarantees all citizens the
right to “ c o n s e rve ” their language, and all religi o u s
or linguistic minorities have the right to establish
and administer educational institutions of their
choice.
But organizing multilingualism in a land whose
multilingual tradition goes back several thousand
ye a rs is no easy mat t e r. The Indian Union today

consists of 26 states and six Union terri t o ri e s , a
number of which were formed in 1956 on a unilin-
gual basis to reduce the number of linguistic mino-
rities by bri n ging together people who speak a com-
mon language. But the official languages adopted
by the states and terri t o ries are not necessarily spo-
ken by all their respective populations; not one of
them is completely monolingual.
English, a social
status symbol
This structure has encouraged the develop-
ment of some languages at the expense of others.
There are, for instance, over 1,600 languages
known as mother tongues, the great majority of
which have no official status and therefore lack
protection. Further complexity is added by the
fact that every language community consists of at
least three interlanguages. Hindi alone has 48
variants. In this country where nationhood is a
recent phenomenon, language has become a focal
point of socio-political action. Unsurprisingly,
language policy has always been a subject of
debate and controversy between politicians, edu-
cators and planners.
To d ay in the official domain there is a strict hie-
r a r c hy of Indian languages. At the top are Hindi
and English. Next come the official languages of
the states and terri t o ri e s , f o l l owed by languages
w h i c h , although not used for administrat i ve pur-
poses, are spoken by more than a million people.
Hundreds of others at the foot of the ladder are
monitored by a Commissioner for Linguistic Mino-
rities who only has advisory powe rs and cannot
force state governments to follow his recommen-
d at i o n s. Some state gove rnments are optimistically
hoping that minority languages within their juris-
diction will die out before they get a chance to be
used in education.
M e a n w h i l e , English is gaining gr o u n d . In 1949
constitutional provision was made for parliamen-
t a ry business to be transacted in Hindi or in English
but that after 15 years only Hindi should be used.
H owe ve r , after this time had elapsed, Hindi wa s
just as much a foreign language as English for two -
thirds of the population. Regarded as a “neutral”
language for wider communicat i o n , and the lan-
guage of technology, modernity and development,
English is also a social status symbol.The resultant
Anglomania is detrimental not only to the gr owth of
Indian languages but also to the “ n o rm a l ” d e ve-
lopment of Indian society. It sometimes reaches
grotesque proport i o n s. Politicians who decry the
use of English sometimes send their children to the
best schools in which English is the medium of ins-
truction.
It is up to the intellectual elites of minority com-
munities to promote their mother tongues. Often
bi- or trilingual,they must initiate projects to keep
out the neo-colonial intru d e r , gi ve a new impetus to
dying languages and adapt them to the modern
world. ■
A literacy class for Indian women,accompanied by their children.
