11
DEMOCRACY
IN THE LIGH T
OF DICTATORSHIP
◗ Alain Touraine
■
General Pinochet has frequently insisted that his actions can only be judged in
Chile since they were carried out on a national scale.The existence of “Operation
C o n d o r ,” h owe ve r , p r oves his claims are misguided. The dictat o rs of Chile,
U ru g u ay, Brazil , Pa r a g u ay and Bolivia—along with security forces in Argentina eve n
before that country ’s coup in 1976—embarked on a programme of co-operation aimed at
killing their opponents or making them disappear.They decided to make Asuncion the
headquarters of the programme, or rather their plans for eradication.Hence the interest
in papers from the period found in Paraguay.
The documents that can be consulted in Asuncion are mainly police archives cove ri n g
Paraguay alone. Besides, as is already known, the discovery of these files dates back to
October 1992, when they were made available for viewing (albeit with some difficulty)
through the Supreme Court.
It is quite possible to argue from a strictly technical point of view that UN E S C O s h o u l d
attach great importance to these archives. But the enormous interest stirred by these files
and their details of disappearances and murders has gi ven the “ a r c h i ves of terr o r ” a wider
symbolic importance.This was clearly shown by the press coverage in many countries
devoted to the joint mission organized by UNESCO and a group of French specialists.1
We are faced with a find that has aroused the deepest emotions.That is why we think
it vital that UN E S C O o f ficially show its interest in these files echoing the terrible events that
d e s t r oyed democracy in the southern cone of A m e ri c a . I am convinced that , in the eyes of
UNESCO, the symbolic importance of these archives as perceived by public opinion must
r ate as the chief consideration—and one that goes far beyond the simple contents of
the files.
There is good reason to believe that other archives exist in various Paraguayan min-
istries and above all in the records of the armed forces or their intelligence services. Doc-
uments are probably to be found in other countri e s.The presidents of the nations invo l ve d
should follow the example of Brazilian President F. H . C a r d o s o, who has opened his
country’s military archives for viewing.
On a wider front, the time has come throughout Latin A m e rica for memory to be
r e g a i n e d .M a ny people have held, in good faith or not, t h at the conflicts of the past had to
be forgotten so a new future could be built.As a result,the past was set up in opposition
to the future.This is a mistake.A country or an individual that fails to face up to the past
is unable, in general, to face up to the future. D e m o c r a cy cannot be built if the motives and
workings of dictatorships are not understood. ■
1. This mission visited Asuncion in May 2000 following a request from the Paraguayan authorities for
help in putting these files on the Memory of the World Register, one element of a programme aimed at
safeguarding and promoting the documentary heritage of humanity to ensure records are preserved and
available for consultation.
◗ Professor at the Ecole des hautes
études en sciences sociales
(EHESS), Paris
