In the United Stat e s ,business journ a l s , market guru s , economics professors and highly
paid consultants talk incessantly about the coming global boom, the transform at i o n
of the wo r k p l a c e , the technology revolution and the knowledge explosion. It is
implied that the world is slowly becoming a reproduction of Silicon Valley. It is asserted
that this is the future. But instead of swallowing this hype, perhaps we should pull back
and look at the globe as a whole.
The pessimistic view would be to point out what is currently occurring in Kosovo,We s t
A f ri c a ,R wa n d a ,C h e c h nya , Kashmir and elsewhere.We might also follow Robert Kaplan
in the trips he describes in To the Ends of the Earth1, only to discover that much of huma-
nity is headed for disaster and self-destruction. I do not wish to be as negative as that.
However, I would like to offer a caution to those who portray globalization in an uncri-
tical and overly enthusiastic manner.
Each day I send and receive up to 40 messages on the Internet.From my home I can
search the web sites of the World Bank and the United Nations to find new dat a , read the
New Yo rk Ti m e s and check the 9 million book titles in the Yale Unive rsity Library.The Intern e t
gi ves me, my students and my children immediate access to know l e d g e , and the know l e d g e
explosion is at the heart of the modernization and globalization of world society.
One in three A m e ricans are regular, daily Internet users. E ven within A m e ri c a n
s o c i e t y, the computer and e-mail have widened the gap between educated people (chiefly
whites and Asians) and the less educated (chiefly black Americans).This gap will be felt
in every aspect of life,whether it is in opportunities,potential,education or job-hunting.
The United States will be divided into two gr o u p s , one which is computer-literate and the
other which is not.
This phenomenon has been replicated at the international level.The most important
fact is that we are in the midst of a technology revolution that seems less likely to close the
gap between rich and poor countries than to widen the gap even further.
The technology revolution and the communications revolution still bypass billions of
human beings. From UN E S C O’s standpoint, the Internet may have more influence than any
single medium upon global educational and cultural developments in the coming century.
Yet only 2.4 per cent of the wo r l d ’s population is on the Intern e t , or one person out of 40.
In Southeast A s i a , only one person in 200 is linked to the Intern e t . In the Arab stat e s ,o n l y
one person in 500 has Internet access, while in Africa only one person in a 1,000 is an
I n t e rnet user.This situation will not change as long as those lands lack electri c i t y, t e l e p h o n e
wires and infrastructure.They cannot afford either computers or the expensive software
they require.If knowledge indeed equals power,the developing world may have less real
power nowadays than it did 30 years ago, before the Internet was developed.
If we want to work toward a knowledge-based society in the coming century, over at
least the next 10 years we need to make a concerted effort to bring poorer societies into
the system of electronic communications.This effort will need to be coordinated by the
World Bank,the UN Development Programme, UNESCO, the NGO community and the
global business community.
The altern at i ve is to perp e t u ate a world which is fundamentally undemocratic and stru c-
turally unsound.If we do nothing, if we let the knowledge explosion intensify in techno-
logy-rich societies while poorer societies fall further and further behind,the growing gap
b e t ween haves and have-nots will lead to widespread discontent and threaten any prospect
of global harm o ny and intern ational unders t a n d i n g .This is the most significant challenge
we face.We have no time to waste in responding. ■
1. Robert Kaplan’s book suggests that in most of the Third World conditions will get worse,largely
because of the effects of overpopulation, environmental deterioration and social breakdown.
T HE EL ECT RONIC GAP
Paul Ke n n e d y
British historian Paul Kennedy 
is the J. Richardson Dilworth
Professor of History at Yale
University (U.S.A.). He is the
author of a widely acclaimed
work, The Rise and Fall of the
Great Powers: Economic
Change and Military Conflict
from 1500-2000 (Random
House, 1987), in which he
analysed the factors
underlying the rise and fall of
empires over the past five
centuries. In the final chapter
he evoked the coming collapse
of the USSR, and also
speculated about the decline
of the United States as a great
power and the rise of Japan
and China. Notable among his
other works are Preparing for
the Twenty-first Century (1993)
and Strategy and Diplomacy,
1870-1945 (1983).
The present text has been
extracted from Prof. Kennedy’s
contribution to a series of 
“21st Century Talks” held at
UNESCO Headquarters in Paris 
on November 6, 1999.
