Eduardo Portella 
is a Brazilian philosopher,
author and literary critic. 
He was formerly his
country’s Minister of
Education and Culture and
has served as Deputy
Director General of UNESCO.
This text has been extracted
from his contribution to a
series of “21st-century
Talks” held at UNESCO’s 
Paris Headquarters 
in November 1999.
■
To raise the issue of culture today is to position oneself at the crossroads of two
forces, globalization and the persistence of national identity, that are both contra-
dictory and intertwined. Culture can no longer be developed without a basic,
existential, vital tension between the universal, the regional, the national and the local.
Although cultures remain anchored in their national contexts, it is increasingly hard
to believe that the traditional concepts of identity, people and nation are inviolable. Our
societies have never experienced such a widespread break with traditions that have
grown up over centuries.
But we must ask ourselves whether modern trends usually presented as possible
threats to these traditions, including that of the nation-state, might not turn out to be
fertile soil for culture, i.e. favourable to the coexistence of diversity.They might help to
avoid the two pitfalls of ordered cohesion and artificial uniformity.
The first arises from the hegemonic identity model being based on a single, total,
dominant, integrating culture. It was seen as something fixed and immutable. It was
brandished as a weapon, and we are only now beginning to measure its impact. The
twentieth century saw the most sophisticated cultures give in to barbarism. It took us a
long time to realize that racism flourishes where cultural identity is regarded as an abso-
lute. Cultures based on exclusion inevitably lead to the exclusion of all culture.That is
why the concept of cultural identity as we have known it since the beginning of globa-
lization is out of date.
But culture must not free itself from national identity by surrendering to the might
of globalization and privatization.Emerging post-national identities have not yet shown
their capacity to withstand inequality, injustice, exclusion and violence. To subordinate
culture to criteria developed in the laboratories of the dominant ideology, which make
a cult of the ups and downs of the stock market, the uncertainties of supply and
demand, the snares of functionality and urgency, is to cut off its vital supply of social
oxygen and to replace creative tension with the stress of the marketplace.
Two big dangers loom ahead.The first is the current tendency to relegate culture to
the status of a superfluous product, whereas cultural perception could well become for
information societies what scientific knowledge has been for industrial societies. It is
too often forgotten that repairing social divisions means having to pay a cultural cost.
Investing in culture is also investing in society.The second danger is that of “electronic
fundamentalism”. Cultural factories and supermarkets spread a culture that is so tech-
nology-oriented that it could be described as dehumanized.
But how can culture be “technologized” to the point where it is just a collection of
cultural clones, and still claim to be culture? A cloned culture is an aborted culture,
because when a culture ceases to be interdependent, it ceases to be a culture.
Interaction is the hallmark of culture. And interaction leads to hybridity, not cloning.
With cloning, the one is an exact copy of the other. With hybridity, the one and the
other give birth to a new entity which is different but also naturally retains the identity
of its origins. Wherever it has occurred, cultural hybridity has sustained roots and for-
ged new solidarities, which may be an antidote to exclusion.
To paraphrase André Malraux, I would say that the third millennium will be one of
hybridity or it will not be. ■



CULT URAL CLONING 
OR HYBRID CULT URES ?
◗ Eduardo Portella
