‘M y name is Manari , which in my lan-
g u a g e , Z a p a r o, means a hefty lizard
t h at lives in the forest. But if we wa n t
to register ours e l ves for official purp o s e s , we ’r e
obliged to put down Spanish names. So I’m also
called Bartolo Ushigua. The Zaparo used to be
one of the A m a z o n ’s gr e atest Indian peoples.
Our shamans were ve ry powerful because they
knew the medicinal secrets of more than 500
p l a n t s.”1
Twenty-five-year-old Manari is the son of the
last shaman, who died three years ago, and chief
of the 115 Zaparo who live in the Amazonian pro-
vince of Pastaza, along the banks of the Conambo
◗ Ecuadorian linguist and
journalist



Z a p a ro ’s lost s e c re t s
◗ Carlos A n d r a d e
The hundred or so Zaparo Indians who live in the Ecuadorian Amazon are racing against time
to save their language, land and culture

River 240 kilometres south of Quito.The river has
brought all the misfortunes that have speeded up
the decline of the Zaparo—settlers, disease, the
rubber boom, slavery, wars, oil drilling and “the
modern world”.
“When the white rubber traders came to our
f o r e s t ,” s ays Manari , “they took away our people to
work as slaves and to sell them off like chat t e l s.
They also brought with them diseases that our sha-
mans didn’t know how to cure. So most of our
people died.”
“The Zaparo are officially extinct in this
c o u n t ry,” announced an article published in
Ecuador nearly 10 ye a rs ago. But today they are still
fighting to surv i ve , though the number of threats are
more than they can count—in their language, n u m-
bers only go up to three.
1.Manari’s words are taken from a letter sent two years
ago asking the cultural attaché at Ecuador’s embassy in
Peru to intervene so that the Ecuadorian Zaparo could
cross the frontier and meet the Zaparo of Peru. Continued page 22

For the last three years young Zaparo led by
Manari and supported by the Pastaza Indigenous
Peoples’ Organization (OPIP) have been engaged
in a battle to save their culture and traditional way
of life as hunters and gatherers. They have three
main objectives: to keep alive the Zaparo langua-
ge, to clearly mark out Zaparo territory and to
arrange a meeting with Zaparo who live over the
border in Peru.The results so far have not been
very encouraging.
The last shaman
They have not been able to meet their Pe ru v i a n
k i n s f o l k , from whom they have been separated since
a war between Ecuador and Pe ru nearly 60 ye a rs
a g o.The journey can take a month when the ri ver is
l ow and up to three months during a flo o d . It wa s
only a couple of months ago that someone gave the
Zaparo a small motor-boat . D i p l o m atic contacts
would also have to be made to enable the Ecuadori a n
Zaparo to journey into disputed terri t o ry.
“ We ’re Ecuadori a n s ,” s ays Manari , “ but once
upon a time the Zaparo were a single people living
in a single forest. So we ’re not used to getting per-
mission to cross borders or search for our people.”
The plan is for a group of four children, alrea-
dy chosen, to go and meet the shamans on the
Peruvian side who will teach them their methods.
This is crucial if the community is to survive,
because when the last shaman died three years
ago, the Zaparo lost their only source of knowled-
ge about their traditions, the healing power of
plants and the secrets of the jungle. “Since my
father died, there’s been no one to look after us,
and many people are ill and dying,” says Manari.
Traditional knowledge and the remedies of
shamans can only be handed down through lan-
guage. Preserving the Zaparo language is more
than just a cultural matter. The physical survival
of the community itself is at stake. And the plan
to save it is a race against time because only five
very old people still speak Zaparo and they live
several days’ journey from each other. One of
them is Sasiko Takiauri, who was born about 70
years ago on the banks of the Conambo. “In those
days,” he says, “everyone spoke Zaparo. I didn’t
learn Quechua until I was 18.”
The story of Zaparo is similar to that of other
indigenous languages in the Ecuadorian-Peruvian
region. Zaparo forms part of the Zaparoan lin-
guistic group, together with Arabela, Iquito and
Taushniro, and is related to other languages that
have already disappeared (Konambo, Gae and
Andoa).It gave way to Quechua relatively recent-
ly. It was about 60 years ago, according to Sasiko,
that the Zaparo began identifying with the cultu-
re of the Quechua Indians through frequent tra-
ding with the Quechua village of Sarayacu.
These days, Sasiko’s grandchildren and great-
grandchildren who live in the Zaparo villages of
Llanchama, Cocha, Jandia Yacu and Mazaramu,
are taught Quechua and Spanish under a bilin-
gual curriculum decreed by the government.The
teachers, secondary school graduates who do not
originate from the villages where they teach, are
paid $4 a month and openly say they will leave
the region as soon as they can. Most of their
pupils do not speak Spanish and learn Quechua
almost entirely in oral form.
“ We don’t like asking for help,” s ays Manari ,
“ but since there are now only a few of us left, we ’r e
afraid it’s the end of the road.” M e a n w h i l e , the old
f o l k , led by Sasiko, are once again giving children
names in the ve rnacular—such as Newa , To a r o,
Mukutzagua (Pa rt ri d g e , Pa rr o t , O riole)—to show
the world the Zaparo have not died out. ■

Zaparo Indians pictured in a book by the 19th-century Italian explorer Gaetano Osculati.
