but that situation is likely to change. Part
4 of the GATS agreement (“Progressive
liberalization”) requires that fresh nego-
tiations should be held by the end of 2000
at the latest, and should be directed to
“the elimination of the adverse effects on
trade in services of measures as a means
of providing effective market access”. At
the Geneva headquarters of the World
Trade Organization (WTO), far from the
headlines and the demonstrators, work
still goes on. But independently of the
WTO and national policies, a number of
factors are driving educational systems
towards “commercialization”.
Pressures
for change
First, education is a rapidly-growing
sector in which governments are finding it
harder and harder to satisfy demand,
above all in higher education. Between
1985 and 1992, the number of students
in higher education rose about 26 per
cent—from 58.6 to 73.7 million.
Meanwhile,public spending on education
has tended to stagnate over the past 15
years (5-6 per cent of GDP in rich coun-
tries and 4 per cent elsewhere).
In view of this dearth of public spen-
ding, parents and students are increasin-
gly looking to private education for a
solution. In the United States, every epi-
sode of violence in a state school and
every scandal that rocks official school
systems gives a boost to “home schoo-
ling”, where children no longer attend
school and are taught at home.
Traditional public education is also
coming in for strong criticism. Employers
complain it is not geared to their needs
and is not flexible enough. An influential
European employers’ pressure group, the
Industrial Round Table, deplores the fact

Most of us see education as first and
foremost a public service which is res-
ponsible for providing young people
with instru c t i o n . For inve s t o rs looking for
somewhere to put their money it is also an
annual budget of $1,000 billion wo r l d w i d e ,
a sector employing 50 million people, a n d
a b ove all a billion potential customers in the
f o rm of students. After the collapse of the
S e attle negotiations within the World Tr a d e
O r g a n i z ation at the end of 1999, it is hard
to say when the “Millennium Round” o f
trade talks will start . But education will sur-
ely be somewhere on the agenda,since the
e d u c ation market is gr owing at breakneck
speed.
The decision to extend to services the
liberalization of international trade which
previously applied to commodities was
taken in 1994. The General Agreement
on Trade in Services (GATS) which was
signed in April of that year included edu-
cation on the list of services to be liberali-
zed. To stay outside the scope of this
agreement, a country’s education system
must be completely financed and admi-
nistered by the state, which is no longer
the case anywhere. However, each coun-
try can still decide freely what commit-
ments it wants to make, and especially
which educational sectors it wants to
expose to market forces. The New
Zealand government, for example, has
decided to open up to outside competi-
tion the whole private education sector,
from primary to university level.
So far, New Zealand is an exception,
◗ A member of the Belgian organization Appel pour
une école démocratique (“Appeal for a democratic
school”: http://users.skynet.be/aped), Mr. Hirt is the
author of L’École sacrifiée (EPO, Brussels, 1996), Tableau
noir (EPO 1998) and Les nouveaux maîtres de l’école
(EPO and VO Editions, Brussels-Paris, 2000).



W ILL EDUCAT ION 
GO TO 
M A RK ET ?
◗ Nico Hirtt
The World Trade Organization has launched a process that could open up to competition 
the expanding and highly protected world market in education. What issues are at stake?
that in most European countries, schools
are integrated into a centralized public
system run by a bureaucracy that slows
down the process of change or makes
them impervious to demands for change
from outside.
Under pressure from economic inter-
ests, a process of “deregulating” educa-
tion systems has begun. The gr ow i n g
independence of schools is encouraging
them to look for alternative sources of
funding, ranging from sponsorship to full
management by private companies and
including many kinds of partnerships bet-
ween schools and firm s. A European
Commission working party on education
and training says “the time for out-of-
school education has come. . . . the libe-
ralization of of the educational process
thereby made possible will lead to control
by education service providers who are
more innovat i ve than the traditional
structures.”
The development and spread of infor-
mation and communication technologies
on a massive scale make possible the
development of paid distance learning,
using multimedia and the Internet for
tutorials, exams, etc.
Secondary and primary education are
also affected. More and more pay i n g
Internet sites bill themselves as alterna-
tives to state schools or traditional private
schools. The computer screen takes over
from the teacher, for a fee of around
$2,250 a year.
The WTO secretariat set up a working
goup in 1998 to look at the prospects for
more liberalized educat i o n . Its report
pointed to the rapid growth of distance
learning and noted the increasing number
of partnerships between educational insti-
tutions and private firms such as the
We s t e rn Gove rn o rs ’ U n i ve rs i t y, w h i c h

was founded by 17 U.S. state governors
and includes private sector partners such
as IBM, AT&T, Cisco, Microsoft and
International Thomson.
The report also noted the increasing
d e r e g u l ation of higher education in
Europe by gove rnments which have
begun “a movement away from public
financing and toward greater market res-
ponsiveness, coupled with an increasing
openness to alternative financing mecha-
nisms.”The WTO report lists many “bar-
riers” that need to be removed before
trade in educational services can be libe-
ralized.These include “measures limiting
direct investment by foreign education
providers” and “the existence of govern-
ment monopolies and high subsidization
of local institutions”.
Education
for export
It is true that these observations were
made by a working group, but as Martin
Khor pointed out in an article in the
French monthly Le Monde Diplomatique
in May 1997, “in the WTO, as in the
GATT, setting up a working group is
never innocuous. It triggers a chain of
events which participating governments
are soon caught up in. Suddenly it is no
longer a matter of being for or against the
aims of the working group but simply of
how they are to be achieved.”
Some 350 U. S . e x p e rts on intern at i o n a l
Services 2000, was to look at how the
U. S . g ove rnment should “continue to
support the efforts of American business
to take competitive advantage in foreign
m a r k e t s.” The U. S . c u rrently controls
about 16 per cent of the world market in
trade in services, including 170 business -
men and women, gathered at the U.S.
Commerce Department in Washington
on October 16, 1998 to draw up recom-
mendations for the U.S.negotiators at the
WTO.The purpose of the meeting, called

services. Its services exports have more
than doubled in the past 10 years and
now cover 42 per cent of the non-services
trade deficit.
The United States is also the wo r l d ’s
leading exporter of educational serv i c e s ,
and a working group at the Services 2000
conference paid special attention to this
s e c t o r. It concluded that the sector “ n e e d s
the same degree of transparency, t r a n s f e r a-
bility and interchangeability, mutual reco-
g n i t i o n , and freedom from undue regula-
tion or restraints and barri e rs that the
United States acknowledges on behalf of
other service industri e s.” The report said
t h at three points should be at the centre of
W TO negotiations about educat i o n .
Firstly, there should be a free flow of
electronic inform ation and means of
communication, nationally and interna-
tionally. Secondly, the negotiators should
tackle “barriers and other restrictions that
limit or prevent the provision of educatio-
nal and training services across countries
and internationally.” They were also to
deal with obstacles to the transferability
of degrees and diplomas.
Fighting 
for market share 
The U. S . demands are backed by
most countries of the APEC (Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation) zone. In a note
in October 1999, the Australian delega-
tion to the WTO said it would be “encou-
raging all members to make expanded
commitments in all sectors, even the ones
that have proved difficult in both regional
and multilateral services negotiations”,
particularly education.
South Korea took a similar position.
At a meeting of ministers of human
resources from APEC countries that it
hosted in September 1997, the Seoul
g ove rnment put out a memorandum
which clearly stated its vision of education
as a tool of economic competition:
“The emphasis on education for itself
or on education for good members of a
community without a large emphasis on
preparation for future work is no longer
appropriate. Such a view of education and
work cannot be justified in a world where
economic development is emphasized.
“At present, in many economies, the
e d u c ation systems do not suffic i e n t l y
reflect labour market conditions. Their
inflexible and inefficient education sys-
tems could not meet the new economic
environmental challenges.” So education
should be made more “flexible”, i.e. be
deregulated and liberalized. In particular,
“school systems should be established to
allow all students to study what they are
interested in” and “ e m p l oye rs , w i t h
school educators, should share the role of
educating students”.
Some think resistance to liberalizing
education will come from Europe, espe-
cially France. “The future WTO negotia-
tions cannot call in question France’s tra-
dition of public service in the field of
education and health,” stressed a report
on the WTO prepared for the French par-
liament by Béatrice Marre. A few days
before the Seattle meeting, French educa-
tion minister Claude Allègre also empha-
sized his “unshakeable support for educa-
tion as a public service.”
U.S. delegates at the Services 2000
meeting were under no illusions. “It is
likely that other countri e s , e s p e c i a l l y
members of the European Union, may
take the view that education and training
are non-commercial activities and there-
fore should be off the table during GATS
negotiations,” the Americans said. “This
position reflects their self-interest as com-
petitors. . . . It should be resisted.”
France is currently the world’s second
biggest exporter of educational services. A
year ago, the French group Vivendi (for-
merly Générale des Eaux), through its
s u b s i d i a ry Hava s , took control of
Cendant Software, the U.S. educational
and entertainment software gi a n t . I n
January 1999, the French ministers of
education and foreign affairs announced
that France would fight to increase its
share in the “market”in higher education.
So one might well ask how far the 
“anti-American” stance of French educa-
tion officials is simply to protect France’s
position on the francophone education
market. ■
