ALFRED A.YUSON
FILIPINOWRITER
Filipinos often refer to the Banaue rice
terraces as the eighth wonder of the world,
and understandably so.Of all the exquisitely
sculpted rice terraces which climb the slopes
of the Cordillera in Luzon, the largest island
in the Philippine archipelago, those of Banaue are the
finest expression of the genius of local tribes.With the
terraces of Mayoyao,Kiangan and Hungduan, t h e y
represent a “ t r a d e m a r k ” of Ifugao culture. As the
Filipino architect and conservationist Au g u s t o
Villalon has written, “the terraces are the only
Philippine monument constructed without any
foreign influence or intervention, and without
enforced labour of any kind.” They endow the
province of Ifugao with a unique landscape,born of
a harmonious complicity between human beings
and their environment.
For the past two millennia, rice has
been planted under the harshest conditions,
at an altitude of over 1,000 metres. To
construct their terraces, farmers first have
to identify concave areas, place stone
markers there and fill the cracks in the
slope with gravel to avoid slippage.As each
layer of walling is added,the level of soil is
r a i s e d ,with some walls reaching six metres
in height. Without animals and only
rudimentary tools, these farmers have patiently
recarved the steep mountain slopes, respecting their
natural curves.Sometimes no larger than three metres,
the terraces are irrigated by an ingenious system.
Bamboo conduits of different diameters deliver just
the right amount of water to the young rice shoots. A
complex  system allows the water run-off to flo w
downhill and flood the terrace next in line.
The best rice is cultivated by the poorest farmers on the highest,most inaccessible terraces.

Dancing anew on 
the stairways to heaven
Safeguarding the spectacular rice terraces of the Philippines begins with
preserving the culture of those who created them.
In August, after nearly 50 years of silence, the drums of Ifugao
priests once again resounded across the mountains of Luzon
Island, marking a revival of ancestral customs
MALAYSIA
MANILA
Bontoc
Sulu 
Sea
South 
China 
Sea
Banaue
Philippine 
Sea

Author of poetry collections,
novels, essays and children’s
stories, Alfred A.Yuson is vice
chairman of the Writers’ Union of
the Philippines.A documentary
filmmaker and scriptwriter, he
teaches literature at Ateneo de
Manila University. He has received
several literary distinctions,
including the Centennial Literary
Prize (marking the independence
of the Philippines) for his novel
Voyeurs & Savages (Anvil
Publishing Inc.,1998).His most
recent work is an essay entitled 
The Word on Paradise (Office of
Research & Publications,Ateneo
de Manila University, 2000).



ALFRED A.YUSON

Here, men and women repeat the gestures and
practices of their ancestors.Like 2000 years ago, t h e y
use only organic fertilizers and pesticides of plant
o r i g i n , harvested in the neighbouring forests.Th o s e
who own the lower, larger terraces are the wealthy
e l i t e, while the peasants till the upper, n a r r o w e r
s p a c e s. The Ifugao people prize their t i n a w o n, a
fragrant homegrown upland rice,preferring it to the
commercial lowland variety. Other staples such as
sweet potatoes are also grown in forest clearings,b u t
only rice is prepared during celebratory feasts—
along with chicken and pork.
After Ferdinand Magellan reached the
Philippines in 1521, the Spanish easily occupied the
lowlands. But they encountered stiff opposition in
the mountains from what they called “restless and
warlike tribes.” Headhunting by certain tribes
particularly appalled and infuriated the Spanish,
who mounted punitive expeditions with such
regularity that today the episodes read like a game
of tag carried on between two cultures over  three
centuries.
But the Spanish never pacified the mountain
p e o p l e s. It was not until the American occupation that
began in 1898 and the opening of the highlands by
army engineers that the tribes were finally subdued.
American Episcopalian missions then met with more
success than the Spanish attempts at Christianization.
Selling the gods for
large sums of money
Despite a strong missionary presence that lasted
a full century, the Ifugao continued to cling to their
animistic beliefs.The b u l - o l or rice god is a particularly
revered figure in their pantheon. A pair of b u l - o l
figures carved from hardwood stands watch over
each family’s granary. During ceremonial rituals,
Ifugao elders slaughter chickens, recite divine
incantations and pour the sacrificial blood over the
head of the b u l - o l s for a good harvest.Even though
the tradition of honouring the b u l - o l remains strong,
it has become difficult to find a finely carved,a n t i q u e
rice god strapped to the wall of an Ifugao house.
Families have long since learned to part with their
heirlooms in return for large sums from itinerant
c o l l e c t o r s.
There have been other changes:fewer of these
families can now claim to live solely off the terraces.
They require extensive repairs, and the irrigation
system must be dredged periodically.With a growing
p o p u l a t i o n , each child inherits a smaller plot of
land.And sadly, most of the younger generation—
attracted to the lures of city life—are reluctant to
undertake the laborious chore of rice farming.Th e
highlands account for seven percent of the total
land area of the Philippines, but are home to less
than two percent of the country’s population.
Aware that the rice terraces are at risk, t h e
Filipinos have made them a national affair. Th e
government declared them “national treasures”in
1 9 7 3 ,and a little over a decade ago, established the
autonomous Cordillera Administrative Region
(CA R) to encompass all the land-locked provinces
of the Cordillera mountains.
But while several programmes have focused on
the physical preservation of the terraces, using a
scientific and technological approach, few efforts
have been taken to preserve the indigenous cultures
that created them.And it is widely believed that if
this culture dies, the farming practices will go as
well.
In mid-August 2000,the National Commission
for Culture and the Arts (N C CA) spearheaded the
revival of a farming ritual called Pa t i p a t w h i c h
m u m b a k i (Ifugao holy men) had celebrated for the
last time in 1944. So after many years of silence, t h e
tagtags once again resounded in the village of
A m d u n t o g. Beating rhythmically on these wooden
s h i e l d s, menfolk dance through the rice fields to
drive away evil spirits and rats, which eat crops and
dig burrows, causing seepage and erosion.
“After chanting invocations and offering animal
s a c r i fic e, the mumbaki joined several males from the
village in the beating of the tagtag,” observed the
Filipino writer Dexter Osorio. “All were dressed
in the traditional red loincloths of the Ifugao and
adorned with the crimson leaves of the Ti plant or
d o n g l a, which are used for special rituals. Th e
percussive sounds resulted in a complex rhythm of
interlocking beats, to which the line of performers
h a l f - a r c h e d , half-danced as they made their way
around the village. Leading the line was a spear-
Filipinos are intent on

wielding m u n g g i h i g i, who punctuated the beat with
spear thrusts and an occasional whoop echoed by the
other participants.At the edge of the rice terraces, the
group was met by another parade of dancers from the
neighbouring village of Nalnay, half of whom were
children who beat their shields with an enthusiasm
that rivalled those of their elder counterparts.The two
lines of paraders merged in a controlled orgy of sound,
colour and motion,and proceeded to make their way
down through the terraces toward the river,where the
rats and bad spirits were meant to drown.A member of
the Nalnay contingent confessed that their older men
did not want to join the ritual, so it was the children who
did.”
Like Dexter Osorio,we might well wonder whether
Ifugao culture itself isn’t suffering from erosion.“ E v e r
since standardized Western education and Christianity
was introduced to the Cordilleras,” he writes,“age-old
rituals have been set aside and traditional beliefs
forgotten, resulting in apathy and an eroded sense of
identity.”
Still the enthusiastic participation of children in the
ritual is a promising sign. Cultural erosion may not be
i r r e v e r s i b l e. H o p e f u l l y, it isn’t too late to keep alive the
genius of our ancestors, who shaped these magnific e n t
stairways to bring us closer to heaven. ■

 on preserving their rice terraces,which were declared “national treasures”in 1973.
