When did the commercialization of edu-
cation became a concern for the SFI?
SFI has been strongly protesting moves
to privatize education since the early
1990s when the process of economic
liberalization started in India.Since then education has
come under severe threat due to the policies of suc-
cessive governments bent upon following the Wo r l d
B a n k ’s privatization agenda.While the share of higher
education in the government’s total education budget
has gradually declined over the years,private investors
have gained more and more access to the market.
Despite rules to monitor private institutions,
there is in reality no government control over most
of the private medical,engineering and other colleges
mushrooming all over the country. Most of them
have no infrastructure,offer poor quality education
and charge very high fees that can’t be afforded by
even the middle class, let alone the poor.
What are the implications for students?
Fi r s t , private investors are setting up large edu-
36
INTERVIEW BY UTPAL BORPUJAR
JOURNALIST BASED IN NEW DELHI


Money 
over merit?
Samik Lahiri, g e n e ral secretary of the
Students’ Fe d e ration of India (SFI),
one of the world’s largest such
o rg a n i z a t i o n s, raises the alarm 
over advancing commerc i a l i z a t i o n
3 . N OTES OF CAU T I O N
cational institutions where entry is based more on
the capacity to pay or donate large sums of money
than on merit. In recent years we have also seen the
emergence of small time fly-by-night operators.
They claim to charge lower fees and set up illegal
institutions that are sometimes housed in one-room
s t r u c t u r e s, like a dental college we came across
near Agra,in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh.
Many private institutions in  states like Bihar do not
even have the minimum number of teaching faculty
required by government rules.Whenever there is an
o f ficial inspection, they simply hire extra profes-
sors who disappear afterwards.
In clear violation of a Supreme Court order
passed in the mid-1990s, some private institutions
allocate places beyond stipulated limits to those who
have money instead of giving opportunities to meri-
torious students.There were reports that during the
most recent admissions to a private medical college
in the southern Indian city of Manipal, the highest
bidder paid Rs 26 lakhs ($58,000) for a place.
Even in government institutions, fees are being
hiked to such an extent that meritorious students
from poorer families are finding it harder to pursue
their studies. Universities are now expected to raise
25 percent of their recurring expenditure through
fees and other methods. We found that due to a
c a s h - c r u n c h , many government-run institutes were
unable to upgrade their laboratories and syllabi.
Has commercialization improved the quality of
education?
N o.The overall quality of private educational
institutions is abysmal, though there may be a
few exceptions like the Pai group of educational
centres operating in southern India. Our own stu-
dies found that some promoters of private edu-
cational institutes openly violate the laws of the
l a n d , primarily through the fact that they run their
institutions in the name of trusts, meaning without

Against commercial education:students protest in New Delhi earlier this year.

a profit motive. Despite making huge profits
through students fees, these private institutions
submit records showing that they are not making
any and claim that they’re re-investing the money
to set up more institutions.
What kind of public response has there been?
People are upset,but they don’t have a forum to
p r o t e s t .Apart from the left,even mainstream political
parties are not bothered about this.A large section of
the media has failed to take up the issue and
concerned students are not allowed to raise their
v o i c e. In fact, the government did not give permission
to the SFI to hold a rally on the issue in New Delhi
last September, but we organized demonstrations
in most state capitals. In November,we plan to mobi-
lize 100,000 students in Delhi to protest against the
commercialization of education. ■
