A ROMA GHETTO IN FLORENCE
◗ Nicola Solimano and Tiziana Mori
Florence, a cosmopolitan city where the world’s
greatest art and architecture attest to a blen-
ding of cultures, has for ten years been debating
the fate of some 200 Roma families—approximately
1,000 people—living within its boundaries. Like
other major Italian cities where Roma have spon-
taneously settled, Tuscany’s capital has opted for
the solution of “nomad campgrounds”: in essence,
reserves where newcomers are herded together.
Most of the Roma in Florence are from Mace-
donia and Kosovo. They came during the past fif-
teen years, driven from their homes by the econo-
mic crisis and wars that have racked the region,
where they had almost completely given up their
wandering ways and settled down in certain neigh-
bourhoods of large cities.
At first, the Roma of Florence and the surroun-
ding area constantly moved around in small family
groups, driven from one place to the next by pro-
testing neighbours or by real estate projects laun-
ched in new, expanding suburbs. In the early 90s,
the municipality decided to concentrate them in
two “nomad campgrounds”. One is on the site of a
former rubbish dump located in a flood-prone area
near the river Arno. The other is a strip of land wed-
ged between the railroad tracks and the highway.
These unusable spaces were of interest to no one.
In Florence and elsewhere, the areas chosen for
“nomad campgrounds” revealed a widespread atti-
tude: Gypsies must be kept apart from the genera l
population, and the general population would do
best to keep their distance from them.
The city’s government considered these camp-
grounds a tempora ry solution. In fact, they were the
first in a series of other “tempora ry solutions” and
have never been called into question. All the classic
earmarks of ghetto pathology have appeared there;
the risk of fire is especially high. On several occa-
◗ Members of the Michelucci Foundation, Florence
sions, children have died in blazes when their
parents were unable to rescue them. Sanitary faci-
lities are collective. Each is used by several families,
with obvious consequences on health, mainte-
nance costs and relations between families.
The deterioration of facilities, living conditions
and social relations was inevitable. Scourges such
as drug abuse, partly due to contact with disad-
vantaged members of the local community, have
led to increased control by the authorities. The
campgrounds are closed spaces; their entra n c e s
are under surveillance; the comings and goings of
Roma and non-Roma alike are recorded. All the
features making up a ghetto are in place.
In the past few years, Roma organizations and
volunteers supported by a few rare but well-know n
intellectuals, such as the writer Antonio Tabucchi,
have pressured the municipality into finding alter-
native solutions. Under a regional law based on a
Michelucci Foundation project, the authorities have
built a small sub-division of six housing units assi-
gned to Roma from Macedonia. The project was
so successful that some 30 other families have
been re-accommodated in city - owned units. These
experiments show that, when they are taken out of
the degrading living conditions and exclusion in
which they had been living for years, Roma families
seize the opportunity to integrate themselves
socially and economically.
H owever, the building of the sub-division met
with fierce criticism in Florence, exploited by right-
wing parties, which dissuaded the municipality from
undertaking similar projects. Not enough families
have been relocated to permanently close the
“nomad campgrounds”, where Roma refugees fle e i n g
the war in Kosovo have arrived in the meantime.
Florence continues presenting the face of a city
of art and culture to the world, while at the same
time it is incapable of striking a dialogue with a
small minority from a different background. ■
