
MARK WALSH
ASSOCIATE EDITOR OF EDUCATION WEEK (U.S.)


E d i s o n ’s third wa y
In a less than a decade, a New York-based company has established a
reputation for managing troubled public schools, but the venture is still
struggling to make a profit
Benno C. Schmidt Jr. stunned many when
he quit one of the most prestigious posi-
tions in academia in 1992 to help lead a
controversial educational venture that
had no guarantee it would ever open its
first school.
Schmidt was lured from the presidency of Ya l e
University by media entrepreneur Christopher
Whittle to bring some educational prestige to what was
then known as the Edison Project,a venture launched
in 1991.The goal:to try new approaches in elementary
and secondary education that Whittle believed would
be as revolutionary as Thomas Edison’s replacement
of the candle with the electric light bulb.
Nine years later, Edison Schools Inc. is viewed
as the leading company in the movement towards
private management of public education in the U. S.
It now manages 108 public schools serving some
57,000 students, up from 25 schools in 1997-98.
Many are so-called charter schools, namely public
schools that are largely independent of the tradi-
tional school districts and operate free of many
state bureaucratic rules.They receive funding from
the state government on a per-pupil basis and
parents pay no tuition. But Edison also contracts
with school authorities to manage traditional public
schools using its educational model.
“Most people thought of this as a kind of expe-
riment on the edge of the possible,” says Schmidt,
“and a lot of people are distrustful of how a private
firm would operate public schools. But we’ve seen
a broader and broader acceptance by public edu-
cational institutions that good,high-quality private
firms have a lot to offer.”
In many districts, authorities have turned over
some of the worst performing schools to Edison.
While the company has a well-oiled marketing
machine, a number of school administrators have
been attracted by Edison’s all-encompassing exper-
tise and bold approach.The company offers a com-
plete package,which cost $40 million to develop. I t s
curriculum is regarded as rigorous,exceeding requi-
rements of most states. School days are longer than
n o r m a l , students take Spanish in kindergarten and
can study for the International Baccalaureate.The
schools have at least three computers per class-
r o o m ,and students can take home a personal com-
puter to work on projects and surf the Internet as
well as to link parents and teachers.
The company has a touchy relationship with
the country’s two teachers’ unions,which have been
generally critical of private management. Th e
unions’ chief concerns are that the company uses
relatively inexperienced teachers, and that the tea-
cher turnover rate is high.The American Fe d e r a t i o n
of Teachers (AFT) has paid particularly close atten-
tion to test scores and argues that the achievement
record is not as rosy as the company paints it.“ S o m e
of their schools have improved and some have
really struggled.Th e r e ’s no magic in being private,”
says Celia Lose, an AFT spokeswoman.
Despite criticism, Edison Inc. is confid e n t .E n r o l-
ment has increased eightfold since 1996, r e v e n u e
stands at  $225 million, financial losses are shrin-
king ($37 million) and its stock has inched upward
since the company went public in November 1999.
While the company’s priority is to get a firmer foo-
ting in the U. S. —it has to manage several hundred
schools before realizing economies of scale— it will
seek to expand internationally. “Edison genuinely
represents what people in the U. K . , especially To n y
B l a i r, call a third way,” says Schmidt.“ I t ’s not fully
p r i v a t e,and not fully public.” He notes that to many
in Europe,privatization of public services has been
an “all or nothing” p r o p o s i t i o n . It has meant taking
a state enterprise “and converting it completely to
private management,” he says.“Edison offers more
of a partnership with government.” ■

Team work and technology: a sampling of activities in an Edison school.
2 . C ATERING TO DEMAND
