GEORGE ELLIS
PROFESSOR OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF CAPE TOWN (SOUTH AFRICA), AUTHOR OF
BEFORE THE BEGINNING (BOWERDEAN/MARION BOYAR,1993)


From b a n g to e t e r n i t y
The big bang is now the accepted scientific account of how the universe
came into being and started to evolve, but there is still much left
to discover
1 . SCIENCE AT THE LIMITS
C
osmology aims to determine the nature of
the universe on the largest observable scales,
and then explain how it got to be the way it
now is.Dismissed for a long time as a largely
philosophical enterprise based on a few sparse
o b s e r v a t i o n s, this branch of science has undergone an
extraordinary transformation in the last 50 y e a r s,
becoming a compelling body of knowledge about the
u n i v e r s e, rich in data and tied to the most pioneering
advances in nuclear and particle physics.
On the one hand, the discipline relies on telescopes
of all kinds and their associated measuring instruments
and computers,amplifying and analyzing the incredibly
faint radiation1 from very distant matter.O b s e r v a t i o n s
of apparent size, radiation fluxes and numbers of distant
galaxies and quasi-stellar objects can now be obtained
up to almost inconceivable distances. When twinned
with theories of physics—namely mathematical laws
that characterize how matter and radiation behave—
the result is something that few scientists a century
ago would have believed possible: a “physical standard
m o d e l ” of cosmology, comprehensive enough to take us
back to the first few seconds of the universe’ existence,
when atomic nuclei formed. Less defined and more
speculative science promises to take us even further,
possibly back to the very threshold of creation.
The basic structure of the visible universe on the
largest scales is now well understood: there are vast
domains of empty space more or less uniformly
populated by clusters of galaxies, with each galaxy
itself being a dynamic configuration of about 100 billion
stars interspersed with dust and gas.
F u r t h e r m o r e, the fundamental motion of the
cosmos is known: a uniform expansion of these clusters
of galaxies,with distances between them ever- i n c r e a s i n g
equally in all directions. If we extrapolate backwards in
t i m e, this movement would suggest an ever higher
density and temperature of matter and radiation,w h i c h
at a certain point in the distant past—in conditions of
the most extreme heat—coupled tightly together.
Estimates of an origin to this expansion indicate it
began around 10 billion years ago.

Echoes of the early universe: a satellite image showing background radiation.
1. Radiation is the flow of
energy via subatomic
p a r t i c l e s. The term
comprises radio waves,
m i c r ow a v e s, i n f r a r e d
rays, visible light, X rays
and gamma rays.
2. Light moves to the red
side of the visible
spectrum when its source
is moving away.This phe-
nomenon is called the
redshift.

At the extreme temperatures (over a billion degrees
centigrade) of this initial phase, matter existed only as the
most elementary particles in equilibrium with radiation.
No more complex structures could survive the
bombardment of the radiation at those temperatures.
But as the universe expanded and cooled,successively
larger and more complex units could form: first of all,
within the very first second of the cosmos, protons and
neutrons from quarks, thus far among the most
fundamental units of matter yet known to exist.Th e n ,o n l y
minutes after the universe began, these protons and
neutrons could combine into light atomic nuclei, a process
known as nucleosythesis.
Some 300,000 years later,
complete atoms were
constructed from nuclei and
electrons—an episode called
r e c o m b i n a t i o n. This event
allowed the radiation,which had
previously been trapped by the
floating electrons, to separate (or
decouple) from matter and flow
freely for thousands of millions
of light-years, cooling all the
while due to the expansion of the universe from a
temperature of about 3,000 degrees Kelvin at emission
to 2.75 Kelvin (–270 degrees centigrade) today. This
r a d i a t i o n , known as the cosmic microwave background
radiation,provides the best map we now have of the
very early universe.
Once complete atoms were formed—mainly in the
shape of hydrogen and helium—gravitation could pull
matter together to form the first generation of stars,
which clustered together to form galaxies, which in
turn bunched together to form clusters of galaxies.
Some of the first generation stars ended their lives
in massive supernova explosions, spreading through
space the elements of organic life they had been
forming in their interiors through successive nuclear
r e a c t i o n s. The resulting clouds of dust then became
the birthplace of second generation stars, surrounded
by planets, on which the molecules of life could find
hospitable places to generate the first living cells and so
provide the origin of complex living beings (see also
pp. 26-27).
There are three basic reasons for believing this
picture of our universe’s history.Fi r s t l y, estimates of the
distances of galaxies (obtained
for example from their
luminosities) can be correlated
with estimates of the speed at
which they are moving away
from us (deduced from their
measured redshifts2) . The data
shows that the further away the
galaxies are, the faster they are
receding from us, thus providing
basic evidence for the expansion
of the universe. S e c o n d l y, t h e
very existence of the cosmic background radiation is
evidence that there was a hot early state of the universe,
because its precise spectrum—exactly described by a
theoretical formula deduced by Max Planck 100 years
ago—shows that matter and radiation were in
equilibrium at early times. Such equilibrium indicates
that the early universe was very hot, for only at extreme
high temperature can this balance come into being.
A third piece of evidence comes from observation
of the abundance of light elements in the universe,
namely hydrogen, helium and lithium. Our theory

As the universe
expanded and cooled,
successively larger
and more
complex units
could form.

galaxies?
The remarkable concept of inflation—a period
of extremely rapid accelerating expansion in the very
first fraction of a second of the universe’s life—
potentially explains both features. Such an enormous
expansion might first have smoothed out space, b e f o r e
quantum flu c t u a t i o n s3 in this early force created areas
of marginally different densities. E x p a n s i o n , fir s t
i n flationary and then decelerating, may then have
spread such tiny variations over regions the size of
galaxy clusters. From these beginnings, matter could
then be pulled by gravity over billions of years into the
stars and galaxies we are now so familiar with.
Fi n a l l y, some current studies of distant spectra give
tantalizing hints that the nature of physics itself may be
different at great distances, in places whose radiation
emissions we are receiving billions of years after they
were emitted. Might it be that
the constants of nature vary with
time? If so, this would be a
discovery of groundbreaking
significance.
The next few years and
decades are certain to see a
massive extension in the quantity
and quality of cosmic
o b s e r v a t i o n s. These will be
accompanied by enriched
theories of how matter clustered
to form galaxies and a deeper
exploration of gravity,both of which will help determine
the model that best fits our observable region of the
universe.
But even once this model is drawn,a host of elusive
issues await.How should we link what we understand
of quantum gravity4 to cosmological theory—especially
the creation of the universe? What of the possibility that
the laws of nature were different in the early universe?
And how common is life in the universe? Could one in
any other way create a universe allowing intelligent life
to exist?
This sets the framework for considering major
philosophical issues within the context of the
uniqueness of the universe. Science per se can never
resolve these issues, but it can at least provide an ever
o f how atomic nuclei were formed in the hot early
u n i v e r s e, based on knowledge of nuclear physics
together with the hypothesis of an expanding universe,
fits all these measurements just so long as the density
of matter lies in a specific limited range—a remarkable
confirmation of theory by observation.
As a result, this cosmological history has come to be
accepted by the scientific community. We have clear
evidence that the universe emerged at vast speed from
an initial fir e b a l l , though this event’s remoteness—and
the enormity of space—obviously leaves a host of
questions waiting to be answered,particularly as we try
to understand its origins.
Recent observations have nevertheless filled in
many details of the universe’s structure and history.We
have been able to obtain estimates of the amount of
matter in the universe,particularly from studies of the
motions of galaxies and clusters of
g a l a x i e s. On the basis of these
f i g u r e s, we have been able to
deduce the presence of a large
amount of mysterious “ d a r k
matter”—matter which can’t be
detected by emitted radiation
such as light because it is simply
not shining. By comparing these
estimates of the amount of dark
matter (about 95 percent of the
u n i v e r s e ’s mass) with those
coming from the nucleosynthesis
calculations mentioned above, we can deduce that
most of this matter is not composed of protons and
n e u t r o n s : in short, that it has an entirely different make-
up to that of ordinary matter.
We have also been able to get much better distance
estimates than before for faraway galaxies,p a r t i c u l a r l y
by observing supernovae explosions in them and
measuring the decaying light from these death throes of
burnt-out stars. This has led to another unexpected
d i s c o v e r y.We expected the expansion of the universe to
be slowing down because of the gravitational pull of all
m a t t e r,but in fact it seems to be accelerating.This must
be attributed to some form of dark energy which, u n l i k e
the dark matter referred to above, acts like a negative
gravitational fie l d , tending to make all matter move
ever faster apart. C o n s e q u e n t l y, it now seems clear that
the universe will expand forever.
Theories of how galaxies and galaxy clusters arose
have also been subject to intensive research. B y
connecting data on the gravitational effects and
distribution of galaxies with minute temperature
fluctuations across the sky in the cosmic background
r a d i a t i o n , we have been able to construct broad pictures
of how large-scale structures emerged from small
variations in density in the early universe.
Yet these findings leave a major question begging:
how can we possibly explain why the universe is so
homogeneous (i.e. uniform) in all directions while also
hosting from very early on in its existence minute
differences in density that served as the seeds of future

3. A c c o rding to quantum
m e chanics—the science
of energy and particles at
subatomic levels—energy
waves will tend to
fluctuate randomly.
4. Quantum gravity is the
as yet unknown theory
of how gravity works at
the quantum level. T h e
theory is believed to have
held at the moment of the
universe’ creation.
We expected
the expansion
of the universe
to be slowing down
because of gravity,
but in fact it seems
to be accelerating.
