Tro u b l e i n
the hospitable land
Xenophobia has gained a foothold in Côte d’Ivoire: overcrowded land, common
law and economic crisis have spawned a “pro-Ivorian” movement hostile to
immigrants from neighbouring Mali and Burkina Faso
THEOPHILE KOUAMOUO
FREELANCE FRANCO-CAMEROONIAN JOURNALIST
T
hings aren’t the same any more between
Mamadou Ouedraogo and his old
school friends and former football
chums in the village of A s s e, in the fertile
black-soiled countryside of eastern Côte
d ’ I v o i r e.
“I’m on my guard now,” he says bitterly.
Mamadou,37,was born in Côte d’Ivoire but his
parents were immigrants from Burkina Fa s o.Th e
turning-point for him came earlier this year when
a strong wave of xenophobia swept the Abouré
people, who belong to the Akan, the country’s
largest ethnic group.
It all started with an argument between a
young Abouré and a Burkinabé night watchman
at the market in the town of Bonoua. Rumours
spread that the “foreigner”had killed “the local
m a n ,” which set off public fury and attacks on
the property of “aliens.”
Ousmane Sawadogo, the elderly chieftain of
the region’s large Burkinabé community, c a n ’t
forget what happened. “ They attacked the
Burkinabé district, smashed up and set fire to our
shops and broke open our barrels of cooking oil,”
he says. Several hundred shocked foreigners—
mainly Burkinabés and Malians—returned to
their countries or moved to friendlier parts of
Côte d’Ivoire. Those who decided to stay were
abused.
The king of Bonoua warned the immigrants to
stop growing pineapples, the province’s main
r e s o u r c e.“Several young Abouré then went round
the farms to check which foreigners were still
growing them,” says Sawadogo’s son Boukari.
“If they were, the Abouré marked the fields with
stakes and red cloth and then returned to destroy
the crops.”
Envy and
the soil
Bonoua is not the only place in Côte d’Ivoire
where this happens. Land disputes,once the norm
between local people and Ivorians from other
parts of the country, are now the commonest form
of violence between Ivorians and foreigners. At
the end of 1999, more than 20,000 Burkinabés
fled by the busload from the southwestern region
of Tabou after a dispute over land ownership
between an immigrant and a local farmer
degenerated into bloodshed.
At Blolequin,in the westernmost part of the
country, six people, including a policeman,were
killed early this year. But the local authorities
managed to keep the foreigners on their land,
against the advice of local elected officials and
despite public protests.
Why this upsurge of xenophobia in what the
Ivorian national anthem calls “the land of
hospitality”?
Until the end of colonial rule in 1960, Fr e n c h
authorities encouraged the immigration of
workers from the Sahel to help develop
a g r i c u l t u r e.This continued during the long rule of
Félix Houphouët-Boigny, the “father of the
nation,” who liked to say that “the land belongs
to those who make use of it.” The “ p r e s i d e n t -
f a r m e r,” who entered politics through rural trade
unions, had mainly economic ambitions. “Côte
d’Ivoire could never have become the world’s

biggest cocoa producer if it had just used Ivorian
labour,” says Jean-Paul Chausse, an expert with
the World Bank.
To d a y, Côte d’Ivoire has a very high
proportion of resident foreigners—26 percent
of the total population, according to offic i a l s, a n d
more than 35 percent according to other
e s t i m a t e s. Their presence caused no problem
during Houphouët-Boigny’s rule, a time of
prosperity that lasted until the end of the Cold
War for this faithful ally of the We s t . But as
economic recession set in, relations with
immigrants deteriorated.
Their success irritates the locals. “ They say
we’ve got rich, have big cars and that we don’t
respect them any more,” says Boukari.“ They say
they don’t want to see us with their women any
more and if a foreigner’s caught with an Abouré
woman,he gets fined about $200.”
“ B e f o r e,” grumbles Niamkey Eloi, an Ivorian
farmer from Asse,“the Burkinabé didn’t ask for
anything, they simply worked for us.”
With the economic crisis and the austerity
imposed by international financial institutions,
many Ivorians can no longer get work in the
towns, either as government employees or in the
private sector, so they fall back on the soil.“ We ’r e
seeing competition for land now as a result of
land overcrowding,” says Chausse. “These days,
many fathers don’t leave more than a hectare or
two of land to their children because they’v e
already sold most of what they had.”
Deforestation and the expansion of towns have
speeded up this process.
At Bonoua, in the Akan country, the tradition
of matriarchy exacerbates the problem.“Young
uneducated people return to the village to find
their parents’ lands controlled by their maternal
uncles, who are the rightful heirs under common
l a w,” says deputy prefect Julie Aka Sonoh.“ Th e y
d o n ’t agree with that but they can’t challenge
their own uncles. So they divert their aggression
and target the foreigners these lands have been
rented to.”
In this explosive situation, H o u p h o u ë t -
B o i g n y ’s successor, Henri Konan Bédié, who was
overthrown by the army in December 1999,
introduced the notion of “I v o i r i t é,” a reference to
native-born Ivorians. The goal: to force out of
the electoral race his old rival in the shadow of the
“father of the nation,” the economist and former
prime minister Alassane Ouattara, on the grounds
that one of his parents came from neighbouring
Burkina Faso, where he had been educated.
A new legal solution?
To some, the aim was to forge a common
identity for the country’s 60 or so ethnic groups,
to others it was a nationalist ploy. Either way it
stirred up a strong brew of intercommunal
b i t t e r n e s s. In A b i d j a n , the political debate
revolved around foreigners, who were accused
of being the secret weapon of Ouattara’s
Republican Rally party and became the scapegoat
for the turbulent election campaign.
Laurent Gbagbo, leader of the social-
democratic Ivorian Popular Fr o n t , was elected
president in October 2000 and made the land
question his top priority.To solve the problem,t h e
government decided to enact the rural land law,
In 1999,over 20,000 Burkinabés fled from the Tabou region after a dispute over land ownership.

passed unanimously by parliament in 1998,which
said Ivorians owned all the land but could rent it to
foreigners.
The law is broadly based on various common
law systems, under which “land belonged to the
ancestors,” explains Chausse.
“ The right to use it could be sold but not
t h e land itself. In the southwest, for example, a c c e s s
to land is easier. Foreigners were able to negotiate
a deal which was nearly as good as ownership.”
H e n c e f o r t h , foreigners who have acquired land
can keep it until they die, after which their children
can rent it from the state. Burkinabé President
Blaise Compaoré recently expressed concern that
it could deprive Burkinabé in Côte d’Ivoire of
“their”land.
“ The law has its good sides but it’s also
d a n g e r o u s,” says Chausse.“It wants to clarify things
and encourage settlement of disputes. If it’s
properly applied, it can settle many things. But if it’s
a b u s e d , it will exacerbate tension between local
people and foreigners.” ■
