The rise and fall of the South
African “s i x - p a c k”
Yesteryear’s heroes are now villains in South Africa, where
former guerrillas pushed to the fringes of society cling to the cult 
of the hard body
THOKOZANI XABA
RESEARCH FELLOW AT THE UNIVERSITY OF NATAL, SOUTH AFRICA
2 . PASSING RITES
I
had just moved back to Kwamashu (near Durban,
South Africa) when I went to meet the son of a
f r i e n d , who had been like a brother to me before
his untimely death.It had been ten years since I had
last seen Fe r n a n d o.The 11-year-old boy had grown
into a tall young man, w h o,despite his size,greeted me
o b s e q u i o u s l y.
“Uncle! I was afraid you wouldn’t recognize me.”
“I was unsure at first, but I couldn’t miss the
resemblance between you and your father.” Th e
mention of his father made Fernando jolt.“ You should
tell me about my old man sometime,” he said sadly.
When we parted, I couldn’t help noticing the
number of people staring at us. L a t e r, I found out that
they had never seen Fernando talk with anyone but
former guerrillas or comrades who put their bodies “ o n
the line” in the struggle against apartheid. S o m e
thought that he was holding me up.
In the following year, I met Fernando about a
dozen times. We mostly just greeted each other but
once he asked me to loan him a few coins. Was he
looking for a job? “I can’t,” he said.“I don’t have ID
p a p e r s.” Did he want me to speak with the authorities?
“No,” he said.“The police are looking for me.”
A few months later, Fernando was dead. A
neighbour explained that the police had killed him in his
safe house.“Get up,y o u ’re arrested!”t h e y ’d yelled at his
friends. But when Fernando tried to stand up, a bullet
went through his forehead, another through his
cheekbone and five or so riddled his body. The officers
then found a cache of arms in the house—some of
which had belonged to policemen who had been robbed
and killed.
Fe r n a n d o ’s story is not unique.Unable to find a job,
he began training former guerrillas to protect
themselves from police attacks because many had
turned to crime.Some robbed banks, others turned to
contract murders. They replenished their stocks of
arms by attacking police. But there was one taboo:
they did not attack their neighbours.They eliminated
Fear and loathing in an impoverished township of South Africa.

those who preyed on the community. One man
captured the feelings of many when he mourned
Fernando’s passing,“We have lost a hero…”
Scarred egos
Like in many transitional societies, y e s t e r y e a r s ’
heroes—the young guerrillas and comrades who
sacrificed their studies and often their lives under the
banner “Liberation now,education later!”—are today’s
villains in South A f r i c a .The “ r e a l ”man is no longer the
militant, anti-authority warrior, but the law-abiding,
wage-earning professional or artisan.
In a world of globalized advertising, the male
muscle-bound torso is an icon of power, fine-tuned in
the air-conditioned confines of an expensive
gymnasium. But in South Africa, that torso, called a
“six-pack,” embodies inequality and oppression. The
poor nutrition and gruelling labour conditions of
apartheid inured the bodies of African men to hardship.
These hard bodies were the perfect raw material for
capitalists of the racist regime. They also served
individuals seeking fame in the professional sports
a r e n a .Yet the glorification of physical strength reached
new social heights as the liberation struggle moved into
the guerrilla phase in the 1970s and 80s. C o m r a d e s, l i k e
Fernando, decided to go beyond the daily hide-and-
seek with apartheid administrators and police to pursue
formal military training outside of the country. Boys
who had never known a word of praise from their
families became respected heroes, revered as
“ l i b e r a t o r s.”Yet despite their inflated egos, these young
men were still scarred by the emasculation of
apartheid’s class and racial domination.To be a “real
m a n ,” many inflicted considerable violence against
w o m e n , which was largely concealed during the
struggle.
Once the liberation elite moved from a state-in-
exile to government, the aura and adulation
surrounding the warriors faded. Those hard bodies
were progressively stripped of their decorations as
the African National Congress took power in 1994
and distanced itself from the guerrilla’s methods and
f u n c t i o n s. Some were absorbed in the ranks of the
new army, private security firms hired others, but many
were left on their own.Lacking the skills to compete
for scarce jobs, they put their guns “to work” in crime.
Power of the gun
With about 13 million firearms circulating in a
country of 40 million people, the gun has become a
veritable extension of the body.It represents the power
to “ h a v e ”w o m e n ,to rob and dominate others,to dismiss
the victim’s humanity. South Africa has the highest per
capita rate of reported rape in the world (for every
100,000 women,1,300 are raped each year,according to
a 1999 study).The country also has the highest rate of
police killed. The grisly details of horrific crimes are a
mainstay for journalists,with equal space dedicated to the
swift hand of justice in the form of brutal police attacks.
The TV footage of the lifeless bodies of alleged
“robbers”may satiate public hunger for revenge.Yet
they drive repudiated young men, like Fe r n a n d o,
deeper into the bunkers of a violent masculinity.
Perhaps the situation will change as the socio-economic
landscape evolves. But so long as police attacks
continue and poverty prevails, young men will fin d
armoury in the cult of the hard body. ■
