Abandoned,Christina, two-months, receives care in a state hospital.
The deep-seated changes that have occurred in our country in the
past 15 years have given some people the chance to strike it rich and
dragged others into poverty

Single parent:drugs drove the father away.



Ioften think back on this day last year. It was May 27,the day
after my birthday. I had just turned 28 and didn’t really feel
like going to work, but, as the Ukrainian expression goes,
“Hiba hotchech,mousych!” (“You must,whether you like it
or not!”).
Before the ambulance set off on the streets of Kiev that
m o r n i n g, I ran down the usual checklist.The doctor filled out
the call sheets, a co-worker checked the equipment. When
everybody was ready, we hit the road!
Our rescue squad answers all kinds of calls,but most of the
time we deal with cardio-vascular and gastric diseases,v a r i o u s
kinds of poisoning and,of course, trauma.
That day, from ten in the morning till four in the afternoon,
we drove through the city following a well-worn pattern. I
d o n ’t know if the capricious weather that spring had anything
to do with it, but there were a lot of heart attacks.We treated
some patients at home and brought others to the nearest
hospital.One man had dropped a 200-litre barrel on his leg
and paid for his lack of caution with a broken foot.
Then we had to deal with a car crash caused by two reckless
d r i v e r s. One was suffering from brain trauma and a chest
injury.The other was walking around desperately waving his
a r m s, trying to convince us that he wasn’t speeding and that he
hadn’t been drinking “too much”—just a few beers—even
though drinking and driving are against the law in Ukraine.
At around 5:30 p.m.,we received a call.A man,we were
told,showed no signs of life.We rushed to the scene. He was
h o m e l e s s, dead drunk and incapable of the slightest reaction.
And there we were, three young women—I was the oldest—
lifting this poor, dirty “divine creature” on to a stretcher and
The people in these pictures inspired me
to share with readers from other shores scenes
from my everyday life. I’m often faced with
distress, but there’s still time
for dreaming 
PHOTOS BY REINER RIEDLER;TEXT BY GALINA KOMARNITSKA
GALINA KOMARNITSKA IS A UKRAINIAN NURSE.REINER RIEDLER,A 33-YEAR-OLD AUSTRIAN PHOTOGRAPHER,PLACES SPECIAL
VALUE ON THE “ETHICS OF SEEING.” IN RECENT YEARS, HE HAS COMPLETED SEVERAL LONG-TERM PROJECTS IN EASTERN EUROPE
I , G a l i n a
Ko m a r n i t s k a ,
n u rse in Kiev

I , Galina Ko m a r n i t s k a ,
n u rse in Kiev
A gripping story.
All bundled up for school in the village of Mikulicin.

But something else baffles me. We used to have a special
ward and rehab centres staffed by sturdy men for this kind of
c a s e.That was indispensable: in Ukraine,“ d r i n k i n g ” does not
mean the same thing as in the west. But recently, a few
bureaucrats decided to get rid of these centres, probably for
financial reasons.And they gave paramedics the responsibility
for “collecting”drunks.
Ours woke up and decided that now was the time to “get
to know each other.” He grabbed me by the leg and started
Companionship in a retired people’s home.
carrying him to the ambulance. Our driver helped us, o f
course, but no man,much less a woman,can feel fulfilled by
this kind of work.
We are all children of God, and no one has the right to
judge that homeless man.Who knows why he’s on the streets?
The deep-seated changes that have occurred in our country
in the past 15 years have given some people the chance to
strike it rich and dragged others into poverty. A n d
unfortunately, those others are the great majority.

pulling me towards him. I screamed, t h e
driver stopped the ambulance, came to
my rescue and calmed him down with
a . . . heavy object. The incident was
quickly over, but my hands shook for a
long while. That time, we were lucky.
Our “ c u s t o m e r ” fell asleep without
moving or making noise.We had to take
his pulse to make sure he was still alive.
It was 20 kilometres to the hospital
and as many for the way back. B e i n g
stuck in traffic jams gave me time to
wonder about a few things. For example,
why go through 10 years of school and
several years of training—three for a
n u r s e, six for a doctor — just to pick
drunks up off the street? At these times
I feel as though my profession,
knowledge and eight years’ experience
are useless. I t ’s hard to escape a deep
sense of disappointment.
But you can’t spend your time
b r o o d i n g. In two months, I ’ll be on
vacation with my boyfriend on the
shores of the Black Sea. I used to go
there with my parents, but that was such
a long time ago, it seems like a dream.…
We want to stop at Feodosiya,the town
where the seascape painter Ay v a s o v s k y
once lived.Then we’ll head further south,
to Sudak and Novi Svet, where Prince
Galitsin had tunnels dug to grow the
local mushrooms that won a medal at the
1900 World Fair in Paris. Close by, t h e r e
is a cave where the world-famous opera
singer Chaliapin used to give impromptu
concerts. And then, somebody told me
about a grove of juniper bushes whose fragrance is so subtle
that words cannot describe it.I am familiar with the scent of
roses, lilies and lavender, but that of juniper is still unknown
to me.
I’m also planning to see the Toplovski monastery, where
the martyred Saint Paraskeva lived. After the October
R e v o l u t i o n , the Soviets set up the Besboshnik (“The A t h e i s t ” )
kolkhoz [collective farm] on the monastery’s land, and the
three sacred sources dried up. In the early 1990s, when the
property was restituted to the Orthodox church, the spring
began to flow again.Now, people come from everywhere on
pilgrimages to drink and touch the water. I know all that
from accounts and pictures. But now that I believe in divine
p r o v i d e n c e, I’m looking forward to seeing it with my own eyes.
But the day is not over.Another call took us to a dead-end
near the train station, where someone found an unconscious
b o y.The siren wailed.We rushed into the unknown, to a place
with neither a street nor a house. It was almost midnight. ■



I , Galina Ko m a r n i t s k a , n u rse in Kiev
U K R A I N E
Feodosiya
SudakSevastopol
Sea of
Azov
Black
Sea C R I M E A
D n i e p r
In Ternopil,a vendor seeks to protect her wares against the blustering winds.
KIEV

In ticklish reptile company.
I used to go to the Black Sea with my parents, but
that was such a long time ago, it seems like a dream.
. . .
