A Jordanian
fire ex t i n g u i s h e r
An insider’s view on one of the most historic water agreements ever
signed—the deal between Israel and Jordan
B
y parking his purple 1979 Caprice further
upstream he diverted the attention of the
Israeli patrols on the opposite bank of the
Ya r m o u k . Slowly he made his way along the
Jordanian side of the river, until he reached
a large eucalyptus tree where a dozen men waited with
r o p e s, axes and spades. Barely speaking, they lowered
him down the six metres to the water’s edge, b e f o r e
following him, one by one. “Give me that axe,”he told
the crew leader. “In the name of God, the Merciful and
Most compassionate,” he said in a low voice, b e f o r e
striking deep into the enemy—a sandbar over 20 metres
wide which had been diverting part of Jo r d a n ’s water
share to Israel. It was 1984, ten years before the two
states would sign a peace treaty that included one of the
w o r l d ’s most famous water-sharing agreements. Th e
man who played a key role in masterminding it also led
that expedition.
“ Whenever I think back on it, I choke,” s a y s
Munther Haddadin, former water minister of Jo r d a n .
While clearly proud of his axe-wielding adventure,
Haddadin doesn’t recommend it as a standard
negotiating technique. I n s t e a d , the civil engineer with
a penchant for international law offers more subtle,y e t
no less demanding lessons learned from hammering
out the historic water treaty with Israel.
“ The trick is to try to transform the entire show into
a positive sum game, so that both sides view themselves
as winners,” he says. For example,“a major concession
The Jordan River:breaking down defenses.

on our part was the recognition of Israel. I had to
make the Israelis feel secure but at the same time use
this weakness as a card in my sleeve.”
Tales of poisoning
As Haddadin explains, all of the states along the
Jordan River had agreed to their rightful share of water
in a plan drawn up with the assistance of an American
diplomat in 1955. H o w e v e r, the technical resolution
w a s n ’t translated into a political accord because it
would entail tacit Arab recognition of the state of
I s r a e l . Once Egypt broke this taboo in 1979, I s r a e l
was anxious to continue the peace process and turned
to Jordan.To some extent,water served as a bridge in
opening discussions between the two states:a drought-
stricken Jordan was losing part of its rightful share of
the Yarmouk River to Syria and Israel.
At fir s t , Haddadin kept contact to a minimum,
only discussing immediate technical problems, l i k e
the famous sandbar, under the auspices of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.With military
escorts looking on, Haddadin and his Israeli
counterpart would meet midstream, standing in two
feet of the river’s water.S l o w l y, they got in the habit of
pulling up sandbags to talk at a makeshift picnic table
along the Yarmouk.But it wasn’t until 1991 that the
formal peace process began and Haddadin began
hammering out major water-sharing proposals.
Whether meeting in a hotel lobby in a foreign
capital or the garden of Jo r d a n ’s Crown Prince,“ a l w a y s
avoid a stand-off,”says Haddadin.When Israelis balked
at his demands for more water, he would “beat around
the bush”on economic grounds. “Let us see who can
afford to increase their supply by pumping or
desalinating water,”he would ask in order to highlight
the gap in per capita income between the two countries.
“Do you think you will live in peace when your
neighbour is starving?”
During the three years it took to forge a deal,
Haddadin earned a reputation as a staunch negotiator
and a hothead capable of exploding unexpectedly,w h i c h
he laughs off as a “ s k i l l ” to destabilize his opponents.B u t
as he notes, you cannot just seal a deal,you have to sell
it. With kid gloves, he informed his fellow officials that
they didn’t own the country’s namesake and would have
to share the water of the Jordan River Basin. Despite
personal attacks (namely false rumours that his
American wife was Je w i s h ) , Haddadin proudly watched
the signing of the peace treaty with its water annex in
1994 and later became minister of water and irrigation.
But Haddadin would pay for this glory in 1998,
when residents of West Amman found cloudy water
running through their taps after a treatment plant
failed to handle high levels of algae.The water didn’t
pose a serious health threat but it did spread a noxious
mix of nationalism and fear,as tales of Israeli poisoning
spread through the media and ordinary grapevines.
“The panic was orchestrated from within Jordan to
bring down the government,” says Haddadin, w h o
decided to resign as minister. Since then,he has gone
on to set the record straight in his new book.* While
highlighting his own role, the real heroes are the
Yarmouk and Jordan Rivers. In the words of Haddadin:
“ Water by its very nature, is used to extinguish fir e s, n o t
to ignite them.” ■
*Diplomacy on the Jo rdan—International Conflict and Pe a c e f u l
Resolution (Kluwer Academic Publishers,O c t .2 0 0 1 )
