Idon’t have much trust in the effectiveness of international tribunals.
When trials and hearings are held far from the scene of the crime, it
doesn’t help reconciliation in the least.In the Rwandan town of Nyamata,
where I spent six months, people would hear on the radio that “so and so
has been sentenced to 25 years in prison” in Arusha, Tanzania,where the
international tribunal for Rwanda sits. But what help is that? The survivors
of the genocide are neither there to hear the trial nor to point accusations.
What is said over there, before a foreign judge, leaves them indifferent.
Obviously, it would be unthinkable for justice not to be done. But after civil
war or genocide, the first job of justice—precisely because it has come too
late—is not so much to punish as to tell the truth,to unravel the complex
nature of responsibilities, and to acknowledge the victims’ suffering. Let
everything be known,said and recognized! Let the victims voice their pain!
Only then can the process of mourning begin,that crucial stage on the path
to reconciliation.And it can only happen before the eyes and ears of those
who suffered or “participated.”
In Sarajevo, as in the hills of Rwanda, you hear that “the guilty must be
tried here, by us.” All the more so as many cannot accept that we
Westerners, who stood by as the war and genocide went on, are now
judging its authors. The words of Marie-Louise, featured in my book,come
back to me: “foreigners usually show a routine pity towards people who
endured uncomparable hardship, as if the pity was more important than
the suffering itself.”
Time cuts two ways. A lot has to be left to survivors. They need it to find a
new footing in life. Conversely, however, time is running short for the Hutu
community, which is living in terror. About 125,000 accused people are
waiting in Rwandan jails. What’s being done about them? And what about
those who’ve returned home to find themselves at the mercy of
denunciation and vigilante justice? The page must be turned on an era of
suspicion, justice must be done so that each charged person can at last
make their way back into society without fear.
Are the Rwandans capable of judging their own? Not for the moment,but
we can help by training their judges and prosecutors. To ask “who will try
them and how?”and to ensure there are some Hutu among the judges is
a step towards dialogue. Let’s allow the time it takes for the people
involved to resolve this themselves, rather than turning to symbolic
international tribunals set up by the West as a warning against more wars
and genocides, but which don’t help reconciliation at all, except the
reconciliation of Westerners with their own conscience.
For now, in the hills, the genocide remains hidden,secret,wrapped in guilt
and shame. This silence is killing Rwanda. Should there be forgiveness to
become reconciled?  I don’t think so. For one, you can’t forgive someone
who’s tried to exterminate you from your land. Second, reconciliation
does not require forgiveness, but a sense that justice is being done. Deep
down inside, the survivors know that life must get back on course.
Because, as Francine told me, “the teachers have to return to their school
blackboards.”
* Author of Dans le nu de la vie (Seuil, 2000), a series of poignant
accounts by survivors of the Rwandan genocide. Orchestrated by the
“Hutu power,” this genocide claimed hundreds of thousands of lives
among Tutsi as well as Hutu moderates, from April to July 1994. 
JEAN HAT Z F E L D * : “LET THE VICTIMS VOICE THEIR PA I N ”
