SOLEDAD VALLEJOS
JOURNALISTWITHTHE ARGENTINE DAILY PAGINA/12



When patients take the mike
How the dogged efforts of a young psychologist are keeping patients in a Buenos
Aires mental hospital in touch with the outside world
1 . A GLOBAL FORCE
“I
miss you,D a d ,I miss you, I know.Will you
be all right in Rosario?”
“He’s called Rosario,” explains Perrota
into his microphone. One of over
9 0 0 patients in Buenos Aires’ José T.
Borda Psychiatric Hospital, Perrota helps host
Radio La Colifata (Radio Crazy), a station that
transmits what patients have to say for five hours
every Saturday.The recording studio is a table set up
in the hospital gardens,while a blackboard attached
to a tree lists the afternoon’s programmes:“ Vi s i t s,”
“ R o c k ,” “ Teenage problems,” “Sports news” a n d
“Dead Mute.”
Around 30 people—patients who are not taking
part,visitors and other station staff—are listening
intently to “A Romantic Moment.” Perrota tells
his life story:how he came to the hospital,how a girl-
friend had helped him as much as she could, how
hard it can be to get a job and return to the outside
world after you are discharged.“I just want to get
o u t ,” he says. “ This is just temporary for me, f o r
everyone.We all dream of getting out of here.”
A curly-haired young man operating the sound
equipment picks up the microphone to tell Perrota
that in two months’ time, CDs of the radio broad-
casts will be available, and that with his experience
as a salesman and role in helping build up the sta-
tion,he will once again be given a job.
The announcement comforts Perrota. It also
shows the progress made by a project that began
10 years ago when Alfredo Olivera,the very same
curly-haired man operating the equipment, was a
psychology student who wanted to help out where
he could. In those days, the hospital had weekly art
and craft workshops “attended by patients who
were wandering around,” Olivera recalls. “I spent
nine months going from workshop to workshop,
but I could see that what was being done started and
ended right there.”
Olivera wanted to do something different, to
“work with the outside world,with the wider com-
munity.”
It is no shock to learn that aside from getting an
appalling press, neuropsychiatrists in many insti-
tutions actually live up to their reputation. Even
today, the Borda Hospital is intimately linked in
both public image and physical reality to all that is
unwanted and dreaded. Located about 30 blocks
from A r g e n t i n a ’s political and economic centre, it is
a place where time has stopped.Some of the patients
will never walk the streets again,others will never
Gathering in the station’s outdoor recording studio, in the hospital’s gardens.
International Year
of Volunteers

see their families again. Some have spent more
than half their lives inside. Hundreds of people live
in vast, forgotten wards. As is customary in the
Argentine public health system, doctors are few
and those specialized in treating mental patients
fewer. All this went through Olivera’s mind as he
thought about how to renew the patients’ contact
with the outside world.
“I knew someone who had a programme on an
FM community radio station, SOS in San Andrés,
and he asked me to talk about what it was like
inside Borda as part of a programme on insanity.
Instead I suggested that the patients themselves
talk about their problems.”
The next Saturday,Olivera told the patients of his
i d e a , and took a tape-recorder to the workshops,
stressing that “what they said would go on the air and
was a way of getting back in contact with society.
“One of the patients then said ’I want to talk
about why women are strange.’ Another said ’I
want to tell jokes.’ Another said he wanted to draw,
and so on.They began to speak. It was wonderful.”
Olivera was delighted with
the first recording, and other
meetings followed until finally
the radio station called him. H e
took along a small sample
(roughly edited with a twin cas-
sette machine) of some of the
conversations about madness
and mental hospitals, and “we
began to encourage listeners to
call the station and ask the patients questions.”
The Borda patients’ show soon became a weekly
fixture on the San Andrés community radio.
According to the dictionary of l u n f a rd o—a Buenos
Aires dialect— c o l i f a t o means someone who is
“ o d d , half-crazy or disturbed.” It was the name
taken from a list drawn up by the patients and voted
for by listeners.
Gradually, while dividing his time between the
faculty and his steady job, Olivera managed to get
other stations to broadcast snippets about what
was happening in Borda until eventually the
patients’ own radio station was born. Thanks to
these efforts, and without any financial or technical
help from any institution,La Colifata is now retrans-
mitted by about 50 stations. It was invited to the
World Communication Congress that the Buenos
Aires Press Workers’ Union (UTPBA) hosted last
y e a r, and for the second year running had a stand at
the Buenos Aires International Book Fair.
With the help of a short-wave radio enthusiast
who regularly tuned in,the programmes have even
been relayed to Miami and the Antarctic. And,just
like any other station, its reporters have regular seats
in the press box at Boca Júniors’ football stadium.
But the station’s boss, a psychologist who was
overwhelmed by requests for advice and has already
lost count of the talks he has given about the station,
still lives on what he earns as a researcher.He fla t l y
refuses, however, to see his work as that of a saint.
He began as a volunteer and remains one. La Coli-
fata has kept on broadcasting because he and nine
other people work for free, and because solidarity
still counts for something.
“Some listeners found out from a magazine
article that we lugged all the equipment each week
by train and bus from my house to Borda and back,”
he says,“so they called us up and gave us a second-
hand Citroen.” Soon afterwards, when the patients
launched a campaign to collect money for street chil-
dren,the car became a sort of taxi service. “When
someone couldn’t manage to bring their donation
to the hospital,I went with two patients in the car
and knocked at their door. The patients were no
longer just deprived urchins, but had their medium,
the radio, and used it to help other people.”
Another listener,this time in Bariloche,1 , 5 0 0k m s
southwest of Buenos A i r e s, even offered holidays for
some patients,who were thus given the opportunity to
leave the hospital for the fir s t
time in years.“ They did a broad-
cast from the civic centre there
before 300 p e o p l e. The experi-
ence changed them, it was won-
d e r f u l . And then there was
another trip to the coast. O n e
patient from Bolivia had never
seen the sea before.”It was also
thanks to listeners’ gifts that the
station received new recording equipment.
Since all the patients taking part have their own
particular psychological disorders, working with
them on the radio has also taught Olivera a lot
about his profession.Each time he goes on air, he
has a therapeutic objective and knows why he says
what to whom.Currently, and for a token fee, he is
looking after one patient who managed to get a
discharge from the hospital.
But he scoffs at those who like to call him a
h e r o.“People commonly put two or three ordinary
people on a pedestal and say how wonderful they
a r e.We ’re trying to get beyond this because the pro-
ject works and is flo u r i s h i n g.We ’re hoping that in 30
y e a r s, this will be seen as an example of how people
can work with those who are rejected because of psy-
chological problems.”
For this to come true, the next step is proper
training for volunteers. In places like A r g e n t i n a ,
this is probably the challenge such work faces for it
to survive and not be canonized in the void. ■
“ We’re hoping this
will be an example
of how to work with
people rejected because
of psychological problems.”
