SANJOY HAZARIKA
SENIOR FELLOW AT THE CENTRE FOR POLICY RESEARCH, AN INDEPENDENTTHINK TANK BASED IN NEW DELHI.
FORMER REPORTERFORTHE NEW YORK TIMES OUT OF SOUTH ASIAAND AUTHOR OF FIVE BOOKS, OFWHICH HIS LATEST,
RITES OF PASSAGE (PENGUIN BOOKS INDIA, 2000)



South A s i a :
sharing the giants
Three of the world’s mightiest rivers flow through countries of the Indian
subcontinent. Despite strife and war, several landmark agreements have
been reached, but fresh disputes are looming
R
egional cooperation appears difficult to
come by in South A s i a . There have been
four conflicts between India and Pakistan
since 1947, clashes on the Indo-Bangladesh
border and accusations about India’s
overwhelming influ e n c e. When the South A s i a n
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) was
established in the 1980s to provide a forum for
discussion primarily on trade, contentious topics like
water resource negotiations were totally excluded from
its brief. Ye t ,South Asia has a commendable record in
the realm of water- s h a r i n g, developed through a
combination of civil society presure, political sagacity
and technical co-operation.
Countries had one precedent in the fie l d . Th e
Indus Waters treaty, signed between India and
Pakistan in 1960, is a landmark as far as water- d i s p u t e
resolutions go.The dispute can be traced back to the
Partition of the Indian sub-continent in 1947. Th e
Indus river begins in the Himalayan mountains of
Kashmir on the Indian side, flows through the arid
states of Punjab and Sindh, before converging in
Pakistan and joining the Arabian Sea south of
K a r a c h i . The source rivers of the Indus basin
remained in India, leaving Pakistan concerned by
the prospect of Indian control over the main supply
of water for its farmlands. The newly formed states
could not agree on how to share and manage the
cohesive network of irrigation, which was impossible
to partition.
Brokered by the World Bank, the treaty, which
covers the largest irrigated area (26 million acres) of
any one river system in the world,has survived two
wars and provides an ongoing mechanism for
consultation and conflict resolution through
inspections, exchange of data and visits. The treaty
Farmers in the Tibetan village of Zangri try to salvage their barley crop after the Tsang-po burst its banks.

demonstrates how functional cooperation on both
sides is not impossible to achieve, though most other
contentious issues remain deadlocked.
New breakthroughs were made in the 1990s over
w a t e r-sharing in the region. In December 1996,
recently elected governments in both India and
Bangladesh decided to resolve decades of acrimony
over the sharing of the waters from the Ganges, one
of the most culturally and economically significant
rivers on earth.The breakthrough came after years of
political stalemate and bitter rhetoric at the public
l e v e l , alongside quiet work behind the scenes by
water specialists, politicians and scholars on both
sides at the non-governmental level.The result was the
30-year India-Bangladesh water-sharing agreement,
signed in 1996.
Bangladesh, being in the downstream and delta
portion of a huge watershed,has been most vulnerable
to the water quality and quantity that flows from
u p s t r e a m .The way rivers are used in one country can
indeed have far-reaching effects on nations
downstream.
When India built the Farakka Barrage in the
1 9 6 0 s, Bangladesh (then East Pakistan until its
independence in 1971), watched helplessly as it
wreaked havoc.In the dry season, the barrage blocked
the natural flow of water into the country, c a u s i n g
drastic water shortages. And in the rainy season,
sudden water releases caused floods and extensive
d a m a g e, including the loss of property and human
lives.
Early warning
systems
The principal objective of the 30-year treaty is to
determine the amount of water released by India to
Bangladesh at the Farakka Barrage.The water- s h a r i n g
a r r a n g e m e n t s, primarily for the dry season, a r e
specified to the last drop and depend on the river’s
flow. It aims to make “optimum utilization” of the
waters of the region,and relies on the principles of
“ e q u i t y, fair play and no harm to either party,” with a
clause for the sharing arrangements to be reviewed
every five years.
Spurred on by the success of this treaty, I n d i a
resolved yet another riverine dispute, this time with
N e p a l , in 1997. The Mahakali River treaty settles
N e p a l ’s entitlement to water flows and electricity
from the Indian side, improving on a 1992 agreement.
The treaty, h o w e v e r, has run into opposition from
various Nepali groups, who claim it is still unfair to the
c o u n t r y ’s interests.
Although these various agreements point to
steady regional cooperation on water- s h a r i n g,
another dispute may be looming on the horizon.
This time, it centers on the Brahmaputra,the other
great river of this region,which flows through Tibet
( C h i n a ) , India and Bangladesh over a distance of
nearly 3,000 kilometres. Although no dispute has
broken into the open,the issue of information sharing
has strained relations between the three countries.
The problem is that even the most basic data is not
disclosed.
The results have been tragic. In the summer of
2000, a landslide in Tibet caused a dam to collapse,
unleashing a 26-metre wall of water that destroyed
every bridge on the Siang, as the Brahmaputra is
known in the Indian border state of A r u n a c h a l
Pradesh. The water then rushed through the Indian
state of Assam and,within a week,devastated parts
of Bangladesh. Human casualties were light but
damage to property was extensive. An effective
e a r l y-warning flood system is a goal that all three
governments must therefore work towards.
Tapping
the potential
According to Indian offic i a l s, the Chinese had not
shared any information on the build up of water
pressure and the heavy rains in the upstream catchment
area of the river, known as the Tsang-po in Tibet.
Concern is also being voiced about purported
Chinese plans to divert the waters of the Tsang-po
with the help of nuclear tunnelling.This appears to be
a Chinese move to assess international reaction to the
possibility of a dam on the river to tap its huge hydro-
energy potential.
Cooperation on river waters could significantly
improve the lives of millions of people. In the case of
the Brahmaputra, it is not so much a question of
sharing the waters as of tapping the waterway
p r o fitably for mutual benefit , primarily for transport,
commerce and industry.
One example: through cooperation, A s s a m ’s
famed tea could be shipped downstream to
Bangladesh and sent to other parts of the world.
Oil from the Numaligarh refin e r y, also in A s s a m ,c a n
be exported in river barges to meet Bangladesh’s
energy needs. These simple but effective measures
would generate employment and revive the
economies of marginalized communities. ■
