The key to El Mezquital’s success stems from its inhabitants’ clear
understanding that they were living in unbearable conditions. Many had
come from rural areas—or at least their parents had—and their determination
to adapt to city life made this awareness all the more acute.Their representatives
asserted that they wanted to make the slum into a proper town by changing
it physically and by setting up basic urban services. Such a strong will comes
as no surprise: throughout their history, Guatemalans have repeatedly shown
their appetite for change, and yet every time, they have been crushed in their
efforts.
The government, absorbed by a civil war and unable to respond to such a
desire either institutionally or materially, stamped out every grassroots initiative.
Such schemes, it thought,could only be the work of its enemies. This absence
of the state only sharpened the thirst for change among the people of El
Mezquital because it gave them a free hand.And, paradoxically, the general
breakdown of Guatemalan society encouraged the emergence of self-governing
structures.
Foreign aid organizations—mainly UNICEF and Médecins sans Frontières in
1986—did not come with ready-made solutions to impose but aimed to
inspire and encourage a movement that had already begun.The people of El
Mezquital had created institutions and democratically elected their own
representatives independently of the state’s electoral system.
The leaders of these grassroots organizations cannot be easily categorized. S o m e
are natural leaders, some have political or trade union experience, w h i l e
others are very ordinary,almost self-effacing people.Their dedication to the cause
is not without a few predictable fla w s. Personal agendas, power struggles and
even embezzlement are inevitable, as in any group endeavour, though a bit less
here than elsewhere.
The limits to the kind of grassroots self-government that has developed in El
Mezquital is tied to the shifting relationship between state officials and local
o r g a n i z a t i o n s. The state acknowledges that local leaders relieve them of
some duties and control rebellious neighbourhoods, so much so that city
authorities officially delegate power into their hands. Links with foreign aid
organizations also offer a guarantee of their good behaviour. But no authority—
city or government—wants to see self-governing groups turning into alternative
power centres:attempts are thus made to control and impede them.
This kind of independent self-development comes at great cost. The World Bank,
which arrived on the scene later, calculated that investment between 1994 and
1997 was about $1,300 per family. Foreign aid organizations must persevere
and be very diplomatic in their behaviour and goals.They also have to accept
that what they experience in El Mezquital is life itself, with all its ups and dow
■
* Worked for 10 years with grassroots organizations in El Mezquital;
currently responsible for water hygiene with Médecins sans Frontières.



FRANCISCO DIAZ*: “A HISTORICAL THIRST FOR CHANGE”
Groups also seek to protect children,the prime targets of poverty.
