Fe r n a n d o
S a v a t e r

o u ’ re a philosopher,
writer and univers i t y
p ro f e s s o r. Despite your
many activities and over
45 books that you’ve
w r i t t e n , it seems people
only want to hear your
views on the Basque
conflict.Does that upset you?
I t ’s a little tedious and one-
dimensional because one does many things
in one’s life, maybe too many, though the
only thing that interests people is the fact
that one day you stood at a corner with a
p l a c a r d . But in the end it’s just one of
those problems. Nobody’s required to be
interested in philosophy, but I think you
should be interested in your own country.
I ’ve got no desire to draw attention to
m y s e l f. I just want to use the audience I can
attract to promote something that seems
vital to me—defending the rule of law and
fighting totalitarianism in my country.
It must be terrible to be unable to move
without bodyguards.
The other day someone asked me with
the best intentions what I felt about that,
and in response I asked:what do you feel
like when you see a large number of your
fellow citizens—journalists, t e a c h e r s, t o w n
c o u n c i l l o r s, housewives—having to live
with bodyguards? Why should someone
with bodyguards have a psychological
p r o b l e m , but not the person who sees him
or her passing by with a police escort?
People should be asked how we can talk
about European unity when there’s
suddenly a part of the continent where
people can’t walk freely down the street.
The Basta Ya (Enough is enough) movement
that you’re the spokesman for has just been
a w a rded the Sakharov Prize for human
rights by the European Pa r l i a m e n t . Can you
tell us about Basta Ya?
I t ’s another of the many recent
attempts in the Basque country to
denounce and oppose violence. Perhaps
what makes this one special is that we’v e
taken to the streets not just to say what
w e d o n ’t want—violence, crime and
killings—but also to say what we do want,
namely autonomy and constitutional rule.
In other words, we think Spain’s rule of
law is better than what the Basque
separatists are calling for.This rule of law
can of course change and evolve, but not
by force.
In the quarter-century since the death of
G e n e ral Fra n c o, the Basque country, l i ke
other regions of Spain,has won increasing
a u t o n o m y, yet ETA terrorism has killed more
than 800 people.Why is there such violence?
The violence is fed by an ethnic-
totalitarian ideology that has developed
over time, probably incorporating
elements from the past, from the Franco
e r a , but which has festered and turned
into quite an unusual threat inside Europe,
because I really can’t see how such
extremes can now be justified.
Wh a t ’s happening in the Basque
country is unheard of. Violence is not
justified but in some places there are
genuine political and economic
inequalities and clear violations of human
rights that explain why it breaksout. This
is not the case in the Basque country.
What other places are you thinking of?
C o l o m b i a , for example, is an extremely
unjust country, with vast economic and
educational inequalities. I certainly don’t
think the guerrillas there represent a
liberation movement, but you can
understand why people take up arms.Th e
same goes for El Salvador, Guatemala and
I r e l a n d , where the Catholics have been
discriminated against and marginalized to
the advantage of Protestant unionists.A n d
of course, t h e r e ’s Palestine and the Middle
E a s t .Without going as far as saying armed
struggle is a good thing, you can
understand why people resort to violence
in some places.
Why do you think the Basque struggle is
different?
People in the Basque country have
the same freedoms as any other people in
E u r o p e. Th e r e ’s more political and
economic self-government than in the
German l ä n d e r, and it has its own
parliament with all political parties
r e p r e s e n t e d , including the separatists. I t ’s
a developed area with no economic
p r o b l e m s. The main Basque problem is
that there isn’t one—there’s no objective,
historical or economic basis for one.And
ETA’s ideas, or to put it bluntly, the ideas
of Basque nationalism, w o u l d n ’t be taken
seriously were it not for the violence. Just
as they aren’t taken seriously in France.
Why is that?
For two reasons.The fir s t ,as the Fr e n c h
ought to know or recall, is that the Fr e n c h
Basque nationalists were discredited by
their collaboration with the Nazis. Hitler
began trying to expand his rule throughout
Europe by preaching freedom, a u t o n o m y
and self-determination for Europe’s ethnic
minorities. Many minorities collaborated
with the Nazis because they thought that
if Hitler destroyed Fr a n c e, for example,
he would give the Basques special status,
and if he conquered England, he would
free the Irish.The fall of Hitler at the end
of the Second World War silenced the
French Basque nationalists for quite a long
t i m e. S e c o n d l y, we must not forget that
ultra-nationalist positions are hard to
reconcile with a citizens’ Europe. If they
h a d n ’t used violence, who would have
given them the time of day? In a free and
prosperous country, where the local
language and human rights are respected,
who is really going to be interested in
Y
The hostage
of purity
Differences aren’t necessarily a good thing, says Basque
philosopher Fernando Savater. Threatened with death for his
opposition to armed struggle, he practises his own brand of
“active pessimism,” fighting weapons with words 

“I don’t believe that it’s legitimate to replace
a civic democracy with an ethnic democracy”
THINKING UNDER SURV E I L L A N C E
He’s been called Spain’s Jean-Paul Sartre and compared to Salman Rushdie. They also say he’s a hero,
though he hates that.He’s just a concerned citizen with an interest in nationalism,for simple reasons
of self-defence.
Fernando Savater, born in San Sebastián in 1947, studied philosophy and literature in Madrid, where he
began his career as an assistant lecturer at the Autonomous University. But after a brief spell in Franco’s
jails, he was expelled from the teaching profession in 1971 for political reasons. In 1975, he earned his
doctorate with a thesis on Nietzsche and shortly afterwards returned to teaching, this time ethics at the
University of the Basque Country. He has been teaching philosophy since 1995 at the University of Alcalá
de Henares, in Madrid,“although this year I haven’t been able to teach my classes because I was advised
not to for security reasons.”
Savater, who describes himself as “more a philosophy teacher than a philosopher,” has written more than
45 works—essays, novels and children’s books. His philosophical ideas, detailed in a personal
philosophical dictionary (unpublished in English) are based on thoughtful rebellion against the
establishment,with a touch of humour and irony.
His speciality is ethics, which he defines as “the belief that not everything is equally valuable and that
there are reasons for choosing one course of action over another.” He has written several books on the
subject,including The Task of the Hero (1982),which won the Spanish National Essay Prize that year, The
Questions of Life: Invitation to Philosophy (1982), Ethics as Self-Respect (1988) and Ethics for Amador
(1991),which has been translated into 18 languages.
In 1997,he published The Value of Education, an essay dedicated to his mother, who was his first teacher,
in which he professes that education is the cure for most of society’s ills. “Intolerance, fundamentalism
and extreme nationalism must be tackled from schooldays on,” he says. In January 2001,he published
an anthology of his many articles criticizing extreme nationalism that had been published in the Spanish
daily El País and the Bilbao daily El Correo. It is the catalogue of an unarmed battle against weapons, an
indictment of civil society for its passivity towards terrorist violence and a call to citizens to stand up to
the ETA.
A horse-racing fan, Savater has visited the world’s main racecourses. His latest book, “Astride the
Millennium”(2001,yet untranslated) is a collection of articles about horse-racing.
As well as the Sakharov Prize for human rights that he received in December 2000 on behalf of the civic
movement Basta Ya, for which he is the spokesman,Savater has won the Anagrama Prize, the Ortega y
Gasset Journalism Prize (2000) and the Fernando Abril Martorell Prize for “his contribution to the defence
and promotion of freedom,tolerance and human rights.”
The ETA has been threatening to kill him for several years now. He lives in San Sebastián and Madrid
with his bodyguards, from whose “friendly protection”he would be delighted to be “released as soon as
possible.” ■
setting up a state that has never existed
before?
What would you say to those who back the
ETA,at least in terms of its broad goals, on
the grounds that armed struggle is the only
way to gain independence?
Well it’s obviously the only way they’v e
got to gain independence since they’re a
minority in a society that doesn’t want it.
The ETA is as legitimate as a group of
armed bank robbers who, because they
d o n ’t have any money in the bank and the
manager isn’t going to give them any, f o r c e
their way in at gunpoint to get what they
w a n t . Both the methods and the very
ideology of ETA are illegitimate. I don’t
believe that it’s legitimate to replace a
civic democracy with an ethnic democracy.
Creating a state can be a political project
because states are made through
agreements, but it is not a right,nor is it a
duty, that people should be interested or
excited about a political programme
advocated by those whose ideology,
methods and ideas—half racist,half radical
Marxism—are not shared by the rest of the
population.
Some say the Basques suffered more than
other Spaniards during Franco’s regime.
That’s pure myth. Franco didn’t have
many Catalan ministers, but he did have
lots of Basques in his cabinet. He also
spent summers peacefully in a yacht off
San Sebastían’s La Concha beach,
something Prime Minister José María
Aznar obviously couldn’t do today. Th e
Falangist anthem, the Cara al Sol ( Face to
the Sun),was composed by a Basque. Of
c o u r s e, Basques were oppressed,
persecuted and wounded like all other
S p a n i a r d s. The Basque language was
m a r g i n a l i z e d , though not as much as
people said because there were still
conferences and classes in Euskara. But
the Basques suffered so little that their
provinces had the highest per capita
incomes in the whole country. Wh e n
Franco died in 1975, Guipúzcoa had the
highest and Vizcaya ranked second. I think
today they come 13th and 14th. So it’s a
myth that the Basques suffered more than
other Spaniards. Most Basques—and of
course most of those who became
nationalists only after Franco died, since
until then they’d been his supporters—
b e n e fited from Fr a n c o ’s regime at the
expense of other Spaniards.
Some historians are surprised that Spain
made no effort to commemorate the past
during the transition period. Franco died,
and the next day there was a constitutional
m o n a rc h y. Don’t Spaniards want to
remember?
The vast majority of Spanish society
tried to look the other way during Fr a n c o ’s
rule, especially in the final years. People
told themselves:“ D o n ’t get too mixed up
in the details—let the guy die naturally, h e
doesn’t have much longer to go.” In the
Basque country, the process of
remembering was more of an agreement
to forget: “ I ’ll forget what you’ve done
and you forget what I’ve done.” In 1978
there was a general amnesty in the Basque
country for every kind of crime, a n
amnesty so global and absolute that its

like had never been seen before in
Europe. The excuse for not investigating
o f ficials from Fr a n c o ’s regime was that
the Basque terrorists were not being
investigated either.The ETA militant who
had murdered was freed, as was the
general or police chief who had committed
other crimes.
Are there any minorities whose claims to
self-determination are legitimate?
Self-determination is a political right
People might think you are against
minorities...
I’m not against them.We all belong to
minorities that are caricatured by others—
to groups of enthusiasts, interest groups
or religions. I belong to the minority of
people who love horse-racing, b u t
anthropologists don’t talk up for us and
w e ’re not represented at the United
Nations. The world is full of such groups,
and there’s nothing wrong with that.Wh a t
I’m against is people inventing identities for
certain groups and fragmenting humanity
even more, instead of seeking to bring the
b e n e fits of civilization to all. E s p e c i a l l y
when the identities feature the circumcision
of women or other such outrages.
But isn’t there a risk of uniformity?
I don’t think we need to crave
difference or be horrified by similarity.
Being different is not good in itself. Some
differences are valuable and enriching and
increase the joy of human existence, but
others are terrible ancestral leftovers best
forgotten as soon as possible. So slavery is
different to an employment contract,but
an employment contract is better and it
would be silly for the sake of diversity to
have some people with work contracts
and others as slaves. I would like the whole
world to be educated, have social security
and give protection to children,pregnant
women and old people. It’s a pity that the
world is becoming more uniform only in
and a historic achievement by certain
communities who join together to form
s t a t e s. For historical reasons, the borders
and area of modern Spain are not those of
1,000 years ago and may be different again in
1,000 years’ t i m e. The same goes for the
United States or anywhere else. But that
d o e s n ’t have anything to do with minorities.
The world has about 200 countries and more
than 5,000 languages, which means most
countries contain many languages and ethnic
groups.
The Basque country (Euskadi) is one of Spain’s 17
autonomous regions. Since 1979,it has had two
official languages, Spanish and Euskera, and
since elections in 1980, its own parliament. The
autonomous Basque government is responsible
for education,health and taxation and has more
powers than any other regional body in Europe.
The ETA (Euskadi Ta A s k a t a s u n a , or Basque
Fatherland and Freedom) is calling for
independence for Euskal Herria, an are a
between the Ebro and Adour rivers that includes
Navarre, the Spanish Basque country and two
departments of southwest France.
The org a n i z a t i o n , founded by a group of
students in 1959, carried out its first terrorist
actions in 1968 and has since caused the death
of more than 800 people, 90 percent of them
after the advent of democracy in 1975.
For many years,the ETA’s main targets were the
police and the army, but in recent years, it has
stepped up physical attacks on politicians and
extended them to other sectors of society, such
as university teachers and journalists.

“Purity produces nothing. Virgins don’t 
bear children”
commercial terms, with speculative capital
rushing back and forth, and not in
desirable things like education and the
defence of human rights.
Do you regret globalization?
U n f o r t u n a t e l y, despite another myth I
hear a lot, I don’t see the world moving
towards equality for all—far from it.
Differences between let’s say Sweden and
Rwanda are going to increase, n o t
d i m i n i s h . Yet some countries have such
horrifying features that you would wish
for a more uniform world in terms of
respect for basic rights.
What should we be fighting for these days?
Creative ability. I t ’s vital that we
defend all possibilities for creation
wherever they are. Conservation of some
oddity because “ i t ’s always existed here”—
when in fact it’s a matter of four or five
folklore experts, archaeologists or
anthropologists conjuring up a historical
identity that everyone then has to conform
to—really doesn’t help at all. So I’m not in
the slightest worried about identity,w h i c h
I’m not interested in at all,or defending
p l u r a l i s m , which I think is guaranteed
because people will always be born
different to each other.
What about cultural mixing?
The whole history of humanity is a
constant process of mixing.The greatness
of the human species is precisely that we’r e
all a mixture of something. When the
human race started in A f r i c a , we were
probably all black and identical, but bit
by bit we became different, taking on
various ethnicities,colours and sizes.Th o s e
multiple mixtures are the salt of the earth,
and will be even more so in a century,
when you’ll be able to travel and circle
the world in just a few hours, o r
communicate through a computer at the
other end of the planet. In my opinion,
everything pure—pure identity, p u r e
ethnicity—seems sterile. Purity produces
nothing. Virgins don’t bear children.
You say education can also change things
and describe it as “supreme anti-fatalism,
the only way to free people from their fate.”
Please explain.
Societies where education plays no
part are stratified societies, in which each
group is supposed to follow in the footsteps
of its ancestors or the minority they belong
t o.The peasant’s son learns from his father
how to till the fie l d s, mothers exchange
information about children and childbirth,
and soldiers learn how to shoot arrows or
ride horses because that is the destiny
society has given them. E d u c a t i o n , on the
other hand, moulds open-minded humans
who can fit any number of roles within
society. Greece in the time of Pericles, for
e x a m p l e,educated its citizens so that each
could become whatever he wished,
whereas there was no education in the
Persian Empire because everyone was
predestined to play a set role. In our
modern-day society there’s also a kind of
fatalism condemning the child of a poor
person always to be poor, and the child of
an uneducated person always to be
u n e d u c a t e d .E d u c a t i o n , on the other hand,
is a progressive force, powerful enough to
bust that social fatalism and create
something new. In open,mobile societies,
the street-sweeper’s child can become
president or head of a university thanks to
education.
In this reinvention of society thro u g h
e d u c a t i o n , what parts do the family, t h e
school and the pupils respectively play?
By education, I don’t just mean its
academic side, which is the easiest to
m e a s u r e, but is not the sole kind of
l e a r n i n g.Although the family has evolved
and is not the same as it was half a century

a g o, it still has a role in bringing respect and
emotional intelligence into the world.Th e
problem is that adults in today’s families
h a v e,or say they have, little time to educate
their children, often preferring to pay
others to carry out this work. S c h o o l
education for its part acclimatizes children
to a more egalitarian and abstract world
that is not just about feelings, but also legal
entitlements, which is an important step
f o r w a r d . The media of course educates
people too,as do socially influential people
such as performers and sports
p e r s o n a l i t i e s. But in the end, i t ’s the person,
the pupil, the beginner who learns. Th e
most us teachers can do is teach. Only the
pupils can learn.What we have to do above
all else is awaken the child’s willingness to
do so. As soon as that appears, he or she
will find the best ways to move forward.
Your books Ethics for Amador and Politics for
Amador were attempts to explain to your
son Amador and other childre n , the bases of
those subjects. Do you think children are
really interested in that?
I ’ve never met a young person who
i s n ’t . Most aren’t interested in learning
such things from their teachers, but in all
my 30 years in education,I’ve never met
kids of 15 or 16 who weren’t interested in
freedom,beauty, justice and death.But I
have certainly known adults busy making
money and doing other things they believe
are important who’ve stopped being
concerned by these things.
At the risk of boring you, I would like to
finish by asking if you’re hopeful about a
solution to the Basque crisis.
There is a m i l o n g a [a popular
Argentine song] which says hope often
means wanting a rest. If this is the case,
then hope means saying:“ w e ’ll sort this out
in the end, bit by bit, through life and
t i m e.” I don’t think space or time will sort
out anything by themselves—that’s why
I’m an active pessimist. Things don’t get
settled on their own: the situation is very
serious and utterly awful. Letting Europe
know what’s happening here, so that it
takes responsibility or somehow helps
those of us fighting fascism, could prove of
use. The same people who rallied to help
those threatened by totalitarianism in
Kosovo and elsewhere need to take action
h e r e.When you do something you hope it
turns out well, and in that sense it is
optimistic because you think the situation
might improve. But it isn’t an automatic
process. The problem isn’t about getting
nationalists and constitutionalists to reach
agreement—it’s nothing to do with that.
Are we going to change the way we
educate our children? Are we going to
change the propaganda on television? A r e
we going to change the systematic instilling
of hatred in the Basque country for
everything connected with Spain or the
Spaniards, who make up more than half
the population living here? Are we going
to change that? Is there some law that can
be passed to change that? We have to keep
on struggling.
Are you going to continue?
I’m going to try, if I’m allowed to.
INTERVIEW BY
LUCÍA IGLESIAS KUNTZ
Fernando Savater marching in a Basta Ya demonstration in San Sebastián.
