Te e n s
talking to t e e n s
By starting a hotline, some 50 Slovenian teenagers have become pros at
listening, conversing and gently settling everyday hassles
T
he phone rings, startling two high school
s t u d e n t s, Tina and Ja n a .“ I ’ll get it!” s a y s
Ja n a .“ This is ’Teens Talking to Te e n s ’ . . .”
We ’re in Ljubljana,the capital of Slovenia,
at the Youth Counselling Centre, w h i c h
began a hotline for troubled teens in 1993.Wh a t ’s so
original about this self-financing project? The people
answering the phones aren’t experts but 14 to 18
y e a r- o l d s.Pairs of them are on duty every day from
three to five in the afternoon, except weekends and
v a c a t i o n s. At fir s t , they were teenagers from the
n e i g h b o u r h o o d .Then their schoolmates and friends
of friends started pitching in.
To d a y, they number about 50.
“Everybody knows our
phone number,” says Nina.
“ I t ’s posted in the schools.
Most callers are high school
students. Some of them think
w e ’ll do their math home-
w o r k .”But that’s not what the
hotline is there for. “Mothers
call us too,” says Daniel,“ w h e n
they have reasons to think
their children are taking drugs.We ’ve got a good fil e
of special institutions we can refer them to. And
when the situation looks serious, we transfer the
call to the professional staff.”The volunteers have
been duly advised that drugs are a matter for
experts.
Ales says the best thing about the hotline is that
it gives teenagers a chance to speak freely about
school,parents and sex.“It’s different from going
to shrinks,which can be awkward and boring some-
times.”
A d u l t s, including centre director Ljubo
R a i c e v i c, psychologist Natasa Fabjan and edu-
cator Lili Raicevic,keep a low profil e.Their role is
limited to training and supervising the volunteers.
Answering the questions is not always easy.“ S o m e-
times you feel powerless,” says A n d r e j a . “If some-
body calls several times, you eventually figure out
w h a t ’s really bothering them. But most people
call just once,and you wonder whether you said the
right thing.” Nejc adds, “ The best ideas always
occur to you after hanging up! So, we tell our-
selves that the main thing is to talk,if only to take
the caller’s mind off his or her dark thoughts.”
Why do these young people spend hours on the
phone with strangers? Maja, who is still a minor,
has already been listening and counselling for
three years. “The high school sent me here,” she
s a y s.“ They told me I was too talkative,and thought
that talking on the phone would do me good.I’ve
met lots of nice people here. We train together
and go out together.We’ve all become friends.”
The young volunteers are devoted to helping
o t h e r s, but they also get something out of the expe-
rience. For some, the hotline is a means to keep
loneliness at bay. Others satisfy their need for
freedom and self-assertion. “ Th e y ’re emerging
from childhood and want to take on responsibili-
ties, but people often tell them they’re too young.
Here, they’re taken seriously.
Volunteering gives them a
chance to make the transition
between playing and work-
i n g,” says the centre’s director,
an educator and psycho-
therapist by training .
The volunteers say that
since they’ve started “talking
to teens,” they have become
aware of other people’s woes
and can settle their own more
easily. For example, Stela, who joined the group
when she was 13,eventually shared her problems
—a serious conflict with her parents—with her
new friends.
The professional staff members have also had
to work on themselves and mature at the same
time as the teens. “ The idea came from them,”
says  Raicevic.“At fir s t , we were reluctant because
they were stepping into an area traditionally
reserved for professionals and adults. But we told
ourselves that without young people, their influ e n c e
and ideas, we could never succeed. Why not let
them take part in making decisions and get
involved?” The 8,000 or so phone calls received
since the hotline opened in 1993 proves they can.
■
INGRIG MAGER
JOURNALIST AT THE SLOVENIAN DAILY DNEVNIK
+ …
Slovenian Youth Counselling Centre: w w w. z - m i s s s. s i
“They’re emerging
from  childhood
and want to take
on responsibilities,
but people often tell them
they’re too young.”
