hen in 1992, community schools came to
the e z b a h—hamlets along the Nile that are
islands amidst an arid desert landscape—
they started from scratch, in places with no
basic services. While some districts are
notorious for their seclusion of girls and
w o m e n , the overriding obstacle to schooling
was distance and economic duress. “ We
wish all girls, women and men of the village
would get an education,” said an elderly
man from Helba, a hamlet in the governate
of Assiut,“but we cannot afford it,nor can
we allow our girls to go to far places on
their own.”
In most rural areas of the south, girls’
net enrolment rates range from 50 to 70
p e r c e n t , compared with 90 percent
nationally. In the most extreme cases, only
12 girls are enrolled for every 100 boys.
Although the government tried to reach
these groups in the 1970s through small
multigrade schools, population growth,
combined with economic strife and
teachers’ low qualific a t i o n s, led to high
absentee rates, and the initiative gradually
disappeared.
From the outset, we were in this
endeavour with communities and the
Ministry of Education. Communities donate
s p a c e, ensure that children come to class
and manage the schools through an
education committee in each hamlet. The
Ministry pays facilitators and provides
textbooks while UNICEF is responsible for
the overall development of the programme.
Lifting the economic barriers was a fir s t
s t e p : rooted in communities, the schools
are close to the home. Timetables are
flexible and all hidden costs are knocked
out, from uniforms to schoolbags. But the
other pivotal dimension is quality. Parents
take it for granted that their sons will go to
school. This is not the case with girls: you
have to prove the experience is worth it.
Tapping
creative talents
Our model relies on active learning.
After intensive training,young facilitators—
women chosen from the area with an
intermediate school certificate—know how
to transform the contents of the government
curriculum into activities, such as cards,
games, etc. They enhance it with subjects
suited to local interest, such as health,
e n v i r o n m e n t , agriculture and local history,
and  encourage self-directed activities,
learning by doing and in small groups.
A plethora of hand-made curricula has
flourished over the years, which were on
loan to the curriculum development centre
for a year.The centre invited the facilitators
to help produce learning guides in math
and Arabic for grades one to three, which
will be distributed to some 3,500 multigrade
classroom schools in rural areas.These have
been launched by the government, on the
basis of the community school model.
Now we are designing teacher training
in tandem with government and
implementing it ourselves:in short,we are
training a whole new corps of inspectors,
s u p e r v i s o r s, headmasters and teachers in
this new “active learning” p e d a g o g y. We
are gradually negotiating with regular
schools to assess children’s achievement
other than through regular exams.
If we are making headway, it is also
because we have been fortunate to benefit
from highly committed policy m a k e r s. Fr o m
the outset, the initiative has not been
regarded as a project, but as a contribution
to national educational reform. Since 1995,
an Education Innovations Committee has
been systematically working to incorporate
new pedagogies in mainstream schools.
Beyond reaching the hard to reach,n a m e l y
g i r l s, this model is showing the way to
changing the classroom experience for all.
Since the programme was launched, w e
have reached some 6,000 children, a n d
female enrolment stands at 70 percent. Th e
real barrier lies in girls continuing their
education, even though evaluations show
that our graduates pass government exams
with flying colours.The first lady,a longtime
defender of education,has given prizes to
community school graduates, to the tune
of nationwide media coverage. Wi t h i n
communities, the schools are catalysts for
more profound changes: we are seeing
facilitators publicly declare they will only
marry a man who lets them continue
t e a c h i n g, and 12-year-olds convincing their
parents to postpone marriage until they
g r a d u a t e. S l o w l y, girls are gaining a voice in
areas far from the city walls. ■

Community schools:
E g y p t ’s celebrity model
Two hundred schools in deprived hamlets of Upper Egypt are sending ripples
through the country’s education system, making girls and women the beacons
of a new learning experience
WHEN GIRLS GO MISSING
MALAK ZAALOUK
EDUCATION SECTION CHIEF, UNICEF CAIRO
Plenty of fun keeps everyone’s attention.
