Open letter from Chief Dan George of the Capilano Indians
‘ I w as bom  1 ,0 0 0  y e a rs  a g o ../
M y very good dear friends :
W AS it only yesterday that man 
sailed around the moon? You 
and I marvel that men should travel so 
fa r and so fast, ye t if they have trav­
elled fa r then I have travelled farther, 
and if they have travelled fast then I 
faster, fo r I was born a thousand years 
ago, born in a culture of bows and 
arrows. But w ithin the span of half a 
lifetime I was flung across the ages to 
the culture of the atom bomb and from 
bows and arrows to atom bombs is a 
distance fa r beyond the fligh t to  the 
moon.
I was born in an age that loved the 
things o f nature and gave them beauti­
ful names like “Tessoualouit” instead 
o f dried up names like “ Stanley Park” .
I was born when people loved nature 
and spoke to it as though it has a 
soul: I can remember going up Indian 
rive r w ith  my father when I was vèry 
young. I can .remember him watching 
thé sunlight fires on M ount Pé-Né-Né.
I can remember him singing his thanks 
to  it as he often did, singing the Indian 
word “ thanks" very very softly.
And the new people came, more and 
more people came, like a crushing 
rushing wave they came, hurling the 
years aside, and suddenly I found 
m yself a young man in the m idst of 
the twentieth century.
I found myself and my people adrift 
in th is new age but not a part o f it, 
engulfed by its rushing tide but only 
as a captive eddy going round and 
round. On little  reserves and plots of 
land, we floated in a kind o f grey 
unreality, ashamed of our culture which 
you ridiculed, unsure o f who we were 
and where we were going, uncertain 
o f our grip on the present, weak in 
our hope of the future.
I had a glimpse o f something better 
than this fo r a few  brie f years: I knew 
my people when they lived the old life;
I knew them when there was still a 
d ignity in the ir lives and a feeling of 
worth in the ir outlook; I knew them 
when there was unspoken confidence 
in the home and a certain knowledge 
o f the path they walked upon. But 
they were living on the dying energy 
o f a dying culture, a culture that was 
s low ly losing its forward thrust.
W e did not have time to adjust to 
the startling upheaval around us; we 
seem to  have tost what we had w ithout 
a replacement; we did not have time 
to take our twentieth-century progress 
and eat it  little  by little  and d igest it.
Do you know w hat it is like to  be 
w ithout moorings? Do you know what 
i t  is like to  live in surroundings that
are ugly? It depresses man, fo r man 
must be surrounded by the beautiful 
i f  his soul is to  grow.
Do you know what it is like to  feel 
you are of no value to society and 
those around you, to  know that people 
came to help you but not to w ork with 
you, fo r you knew that they knew you 
had nothing to offer. Do you know 
what it is like to  have your race 
belittled, and have you been made 
aware of the fact that you are only 
a burden to the country? Maybe we 
did not have the skills to  make a 
meaningful contribution, but no one 
would w ait fo r us to  catch up. We 
were shrugged aside because we were 
dumb and could never learn.
W hat is it like to be w ithout pride 
in your race? Pride in your family? 
Pride and confidence in yourself? 
W hat is it  like? You don 't know fo r 
you never tasted its bitterness. I shall 
te ll you what it is like. It is like not 
caring about tomorrow fo r what does 
tomorrow matter! It is like having a 
reserve that looks like a junkyard 
because the beauty in the soul is dead 
and why should the soul express an 
external beauty that does not match it?
And now, you hold out your hand 
and you beckon to me to come over: 
“ Come and in tegrate” , you say, but 
how can I come? I am naked and 
ashamed; how can I come in dignity?
I have no presents, I have no gifts. 
W hat is there in my culture you value? 
My poor treasure you can only scorn. 
Am I then to  come as a beggar and 
receive all from your omnipotent hand?
Somehow, I must wait, I must delay.
I must find myself, I must find my 
treasure. I must w ait until you want 
something o f me, until you need 
something that is me. I can raise my 
head and say to  my w ife and family: 
“ Listen, they are calling, they need me,
I must go !" Then, I can walk across 
the street and I w ill hold my head high 
fo r I w ill meet you as an equal. I w ill 
not scorn you fo r your gifts and you 
w ill not receive me in pity. Pity 
I can do w ithout. M y manhood, 
I cannot do without. I shall not come 
as a cringing object of your pity! I 
shall come in dignity o r I shall not 
come at all!
You ta lk  big words o f integration in 
the schools: does it really exist? Can 
we ta lk  o f integration until there is 
social integration? Until there is 
integration o f hearts and minds you 
have only a physical presence and the 
walls are high as the mountain range.
Come w ith me to the playground of 
an integrated high school. See how
level and fla t and ugly the black top is. 
But look, now it is recess time, the 
students pour through the doors. 
Soon, over there, is a group o f white 
students and see, over there, near the 
fence, a group o f native students, and 
look again, the black is no longer level: 
mountain ranges rising, valleys falling 
and a great chasm seems to be 
opening up between the two groups, 
yours and mine, and no one seems 
capable o f crossing over. But wait, 
soon the bell w ill ring and the students 
w ill leave the playground.
Integration has moved indoors. 
There is not much room in the class- \\ 
room to dig chasms so there are only 
little  ones there, only little  ones fo r 
we won’t  a llow  big ones, at least not 
right under our noses.
W hat do we want? W e want firs t 
o f all to  be respected and to feel we 
are people of worth; we want an equal 
opportunity to succeed in life. But we 
cannot succeed on your terms, we 
cannot raise ourselves on your norms, 
we need specialized help in education, 
specialized help in the form ative years, 
special courses in English; we need 
guidance, counselling; we need equal 
job opportunities fo r our graduates. 
Otherw ise our students w ill lose 
courage and ask: “W ell, what is the 
use p f it a ll? ”
Let no one forget it: we are a people 
w ith special rights guaranteed to us 
by promises and treaties. W e do not 
beg fo r these rights, nor do we thank 
you fo r them because, God help us, 
the price we paid was exorbitant. W e 
paid fo r them w ith our culture, our 
d ignity and our se lf respect. W e paid 
and paid and paid until we became a 
beaten race, poverty-stricken and 
conquered.
I know that in your heart, you wish 
you could help. I wonder if  there is 
much you can do, and yet there is a 
lo t you can do. W hen you meet my 
children, respect each one fo r what he 
is: a child and your brother. Maybe 
it all boils down to jus t that.
Dan George
This letter from Dan George. chief o f the 
Capilano Indian tribe in British Columbia. 
Canada, was read to a recent symposium on 
the economic development o f the Arctic and 
the future o f Eskimo societies (see pages 4-11) 
by a missionary. Father Andr6-Pierre Steinmann. 
He told the symposium that in h is ' view this 
eloquent letter could equally well express the 
feelings o f Eskimos in Greenland and Canada. 
Father Steinmann. of Puvimituq. New Quebec, 
has spent over 30 years with the Eskimos and 
is a pioneer o f their cooperative movement.
Dan George (1899-1981) was a docker and lumberjack until the age of 60, when he began an award-winning career as an actor.
