A knife at the throat of
half a billion farmers
Free trade threatens to drive half the world’s farmers off the land,
even though they hold the key to feeding the world and protecting the
environment
In the 1950s, an African farmer produced ten
quintals of grain, says Marcel Mazoyer1,
professor at the national agronomical institute
in Paris. He kept eight to feed his family, a n d
had two left over to sell on the market at $29
per quintal (at current rates). He thus had $57 of
income to cover basic expenses.To d a y,with a quintal
fetching less than $14,he must sell four to obtain the
same amount and purchase vital necessities. He can
no longer feed his family, much less make a profit that
would enable him to invest in ways to increase
p r o d u c t i o n . His chances of living, or rather eking a
living off the earth dwindle with each passing day.
A farmer in the Punjab could “modernize”his
farm thanks to the Green Revolution (see box,
p. 2 2 ) . Fifteen years ago, he used $30 worth of
fertilizers to harvest a tonne of grain (see article,p p.
2 7 - 2 8 ) .To d a y, soil depletion and the harmful effects
of uncontrolled irrigation force him to spend $80 for
the same amount of produce.M e a n w h i l e, the market
price has dropped and self-sufficiency has become
impossible. He must sell his harvests to purchase a
good part of his food, s e e d s, fertilizer and pesticides.
The outcome is inevitable:this farmer will have to
sell his land to pay back his creditors.
These two case studies are not unusual among the
w o r l d ’s 1.3 billion farmers and agricultural workers2.
In the developed countries, including eastern Europe,
only 45 million farmers,or roughly seven percent of
the working population, are left. In the developing
w o r l d , they account for over half the working
p o p u l a t i o n ,men and women combined.On average,
each farmer cultivates one hectare and harvests one
tonne of produce.Almost none owns a tractor.Th r e e -
quarters do not even own an animal to pull a plough.
Over half of these southern farmers suffer from
chronic malnutrition: three-quarters of the 800 million
human beings who go hungry every day are
impoverished farmers.The little that they manage to
sell has lost half its worth during the past 30 years.
1 . TWILIGHT FOR FA R M E R S ?
Sources: UNFood and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

“ With such low income, they can afford neither
t o o l s, nor selected seeds, nor fertilizers; they can
barely survive,” says Dr. M a z o y e r. And they must
confront a growing threat: the opening of borders,
which puts them in direct competition with the
northern hemisphere’s industrial agro-businesses,
whose productivity per farmer may be up to 1,000
times higher.
“Agro-business” is relatively recent: it did not
become widespread in developed countries until
after the Second World Wa r. Until then, f a m i l y
farming had predominated since the agrarian reform
that followed the dismantling of feudal properties.
Agro-business relies on increasingly advanced
technology based on mechanization, c h e m i s t r y
(fertilizers and herbicides), the selection of seeds and
ever-costlier investments.The results are mixed.
Footing the bill of a model
stretched to the limits 
On the one hand, productivity has skyrocketed
in the north.Grain yields per hectare are an average
of two-and-a-half times higher than they were 40
years ago; on the most efficient farms, a single
farmer working alone can cultivate 300 hectares.
These productivity gains have been higher than in
manufacturing and services.They have resulted in
continuously dropping produce prices, and therefore
in a steady decline in the amount of income that
consumers spend on food.
On the other hand,the limits of this model are
increasingly obvious. The outbreak of “mad cow”
disease provides some idea of the ravages that high-
yield,industrial farming can cause.Environmental
d a m a g e—polluted aquifers, soil depletion,
decreasing biodiversity—is on the rise.This form of
agriculture guzzles 70 percent of potable water
c o n s u m e d .And now it is suffering from a backlash,

Returning from the fields of Gujarat, India.

because yields and profitability have hit a ceiling.
That explains why spreading genetically modified
organisms is a central issue for industrial agriculture
in search of a second wind.
This model’s expansion also comes with an
economic and social cost. The former is largely
m a s k e d . Through a process that economists call
“externalization,” society as a whole foots a good
part of the bill.
“ E x t e r n a l i z a t i o n ” w i l l
continue in the future,
because one day the bill for
environmental damage will
have to be paid. It is already
present in the form of taxes
which citizens pay to
subsidize farmers. Most of
this aid is allocated
depending on production
volumes and cultivated
surface areas, and benefit s
farms that are the best
suited to agro-industry;the
rest are gradually sidelined.
The major social cost results from the ongoing
concentration of land, w h i c h , according to Rolf
Künnemann of the NGO Fo o d first Information
and Action Network, bears all the hallmarks of a
“new feudalism.” In the United States,50,000 farms
vanish every year. Polish farmers’ organizations
say that their country’s membership in the European
Union will spell the end of two-thirds of the
country’s farms,“in the best of cases.”
In the north, the casualties benefit or have
benefited from social safety nets or training
programmes to learn skills for new jobs in other
industries, which is what approximately 50 million
former farmers in the developed world did during
the past half-century. But how will southern cities
absorb a massive influx of people leaving the
countryside when they already have 600 million
inhabitants who are either unemployed or scraping
by on odd jobs in the parallel economy?
Yet this model in crisis is the one spreading across
the planet, despite its clearly identified negative
e f f e c t s, especially in terms of environmental and
social repercussions (see box p.2 3 ) .Agro-industry has
a blatant interest in conquering new markets in the
s o u t h , because those in the north are saturated. B u t
this development comes with a price: 500 million
farmers in the south will be driven off the land because
they lack the means to be or become competitive.
The planetary spread of agro-business is based
on a binary postulate that has been repeated so
often it has acquired the force of truth: the only
possible alternative would be either the hopeless
“ a r c h a i s m ” and immobility that characterize
southern farming, or “ m o d e r n i z a t i o n ,”which would
purely and simply graft the north’s industrial
agricultural revolution onto the south. B u t ,
observing the effects of this type of modernization
in the developing world, I g n a cy Sachs and Ricardo
A b r o m o v a y3 explain that “the great landed estates
inherited from colonial rule are turning into
agricultural companies.Their economic efficiency,
assessed by macro-social standards, is questionable.”
They see a new paradigm emerging:“the production
of wealth goes hand-in-hand with the simultaneous
reproduction of poverty.”
Time to give a chance 
to family farming
Is there a third way? Ye s, replies a chorus of
agronomists and farmers: family farming which,
when given a chance, breaks production records
and enables farmers to earn a decent livelihood.
Giving family farms a chance means first of all
breaking with the urbanization policy that most
governments in the developing countries have
a d o p t e d .Because cities are more turbulent than the
c o u n t r y s i d e, governments are trying to feed them
at a lower cost. The liberalization under way is
exacerbating this situation, because world farm
prices are generally lower than local ones. Wh a t ’s
m o r e,exports of cash crops are becoming a priority
to balance trade, which is kept under close watch by
the IMF and the World Bank.H o w e v e r, for farmers
in poor countries to advance, “the fruit of their
labour must be remunerated at a price which allows
them to purchase additional means of production,”

says Mazoyer. “ Without protectionism, w i t h o u t
trade barriers, they will not be able to grow.”
The second obstacle is agrarian reform. In a
recent study, Krishna Ghimire, a researcher at the
United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development (UNRISD),said that land ownership
remains a hidden explosive issue.The best-known
case is Brazil,where 20 percent of the landowners
possess 88 percent of the land (see pp. 2 4 - 2 6 ) .O n l y
a few countries have undertaken genuine agrarian
reform, including Mexico in the early days of the
twentieth century; Japan,Taiwan and South Korea
after the Second World Wa r ; China and Cuba after
their revolutions.Almost everywhere else, the laws
passed in the 1950s and 60s have not been applied.
In southeast A s i a , only India’s West Bengal and
Kerala states, where 10 percent of the region’s
population lives,have completed land redistribution.
Furthermore, says Krishna Ghimire, the major
international organizations have come round to
the doctrine of “market-assisted agrarian reform,”
which assumes that the law of supply and demand
can be fairly applied. But how could an Egyptian
agricultural worker acquire a feddan of land (0.42
h e c t a r e ) , which would cost him the equivalent of an
entire lifetime’s income?
To show the potential of the family farm, the fact
that it is not a solvent market for agro-industry has
to be acknowledged.Instead,it must accomplish a
scientific revolution geared towards its needs and
m e a n s. Only governments can undertake these
substantial research efforts, which must directly
involve farmers and their know-how.
Between 1800 and 1940, family farms in the

northern countries tripled their gross production,
then doubled it in the half-
century that followed.S m a l l
farms do not damage the
e n v i r o n m e n t . Th e y
stimulate the active use of
the soil, mobilize reserves
of family labour and ensure
high returns on investment.
They benefit from subtle
knowledge of the natural
e n v i r o n m e n t , e n c o u r a g e
d i v e r s i fication as opposed
to rigid specialization, and
take a personal interest in quality because they
consume the same produce that they sell.
“ The undernourishment of 800 million people is
not related to insufficient world production,” says
M a z o y e r. “ The problem is insufficient production in
the poor countries.”Giving family farming a chance
at last is the indispensable condition to eliminate the
scourge of hunger. Farmers who are fighting for
their rights are also fighting for everyone to be able
to feed themselves decently and sufficiently. ■
1 . Author of Histoire des agriculteurs du monde
(“History of the Wo r l d ’s Fa r m e r s ” ), S e u i l , P a r i s,
1997.
2 . Unless otherwise indicated, all statistics come
from the United Nations Food and A g r i c u l t u r e
Organization (FAO).
3 . Nouvelles configurations villes-campagnes ( “ N e w
town-country configurations”), published by
UNESCO’s MOST programme.
Sources: World Bank, Global 
Commodity Markets, April 2000
