President of the Republic of Czechoslovakia, is 
a playwright and a fighter for freedom. It was as a 
dissident writer that he won the reputation that led to 
his election as President on 29 December 1989, becoming 
thereby the symbol of the peaceful revolution that had taken 
place in his country. B  In 1968, after the brutal termination of 
the “Prague Spring” in which Vaclav Havel had played a leading 
role, production of his plays was banned  in  Czechoslovakia, although 
his trilogy  Interview , A  P rivate V iew  and Protest (1975-1976), was 
staged in m any other countries. Because of his human-rights advocacy and 
resistance to oppression he was arrested several times and spent a total of five 
years in prison. |  The following interview, here published for the first time in 
its entirety, was conducted on 30 June 1989 in semi-clandestine conditions at Vaclav 
Havel’s home near Prague. We publish it as an exceptional document of its 
time—the weeks before the banned playwright moved into the centre of the stage.
This conversation is taking place in rather a strange 
atmosphere. You’re under observation, arid yet you still 
speak without taking any special precautions.... Are you, 
or are you not, free to come and go as you please?
' — I’ve, been very isolated until .the last few years, but not 
any longer. The isolation was effective during the 1970s, at 
a time of widespread social inertia. People seemed to have 
lost heart, seemed not to believe that social change was 
possible any more.' They had stopped taking an interest in 
public life, which anyway was systematically stifled. People 
had withdrawn into themselves, with very little 
'^communication between individuals. '
It was a period when society became fragmented, when 
everyone was isolatedfrom everyone else. I was particularly 
isolated because I belonged to the category of people who,
. in the wake of the Soviet invasion of 1968, were to some
Born in 1936, Vaclav Havel was elected president of the Republic of Czechoslavakia in July 1990 but
D O  C U M  E N T
VACLAV HAVEL

extent singled out as enemies of the state. It was dangerous 
to have anything to do with us. I was a banned writer. I 
couldn’t get work anywhere...
Then, little by little, things started to change. Today, 
the situation is radically different. Not that the party or 
government leadership has changed its policy. They’re still 
the same. But society, society’s changed. People are perhaps 
just tired of being tired. They’re emerging from their shells 
again, from their isolation. Something akin to public life 
is taking shape .once more.
New generations! are growing up, who have not been 
stigmatized by the trauma of the Soviet invasion. It’s been 
a gradual, i  progressive development—though a significant
one all the same. But in my case, I’ve been able to follow 
this development quite closely, owing to the fact that I’ve 
been arrested and imprisoned a number of times. When you 
go to prison, you somehow take along with you your aware­
ness of the situation as it is when you’re arrested. Afterwards, 
for a while, you remain outside the development of events 
and this frozen memory remains in your mind. Then, all 
of a sudden, you come out of prison. At such times, you’re 
particularly alive to all the changes which may have taken 
place .in the intervening period. At the end of each of my 
prison terms, I’ve been surprised by new developments. Each 
time, society was more alive, the apathy had retreated still 
further, more and more people had woken up... ^
resigned in July 1992 after the state’s partition. He became president of the Czech Republic in 1993.

Have you at any time bad to stop writing?
— My plays have been banned in Czechoslovakia for twenty 
years, but I haven’t stopped writing. You can’t really prevent 
a writer from writing. His mission is to continue writing, 
speaking, even under the most difficult circumstances. So 
I went on publishing things. Where? Abroad, but above all 
in samizdat, clandestine form.
In the early 1970s, two mutually Hefstile cultures 
appeared in this country. One of them official, authorized, 
the other clandestine, independent. After a modest start, 
samizdat publishing mushroomed. Today, dozens of 
samizdat magazines and newspapers are published, as well 
as hundreds of Bloks and even a current affairs video. In 
recent years, cracks have started to appear in the barriers 
between these two cultures. A no-man’s-land has developed 
between them, which has sometimes been called the “grey 
zone”. There has been cross^fertilization—the official and 
the independent cultures have moved closer together, each 
of them having realized that it has no monopoly over 
culture. It is this inner pressure, this growing awareness, 
which has caused the rapprochement, and not some sort of 
liberalization of the cultural policy of the authorities.
What in your view is the political and social role of 
intellectualsf
;f§- Intellectuals are right to think about the future. They 
mustn’t be afraid to deal with the future, to imagine how 
it might be. But their primary task, their chief priority is, 
in my view, to understand the present, to understand its 
crises and put a name to them. That is how true awareness 
of perspectives is born.
The politicians’ role is to build the best of all possible 
worlds. The intellectuals must watch, warn, put people on 
their guard. They must to some extent monitor the politi­
cians, remind them how they become divorced from reality 
when they follow the shams of ideology. When I say this, 
I’m speaking as someone disillusioned with ideology. A 
disillusionment which has been experienced by all this part 
of Europe. We live in conditions which force people to 
reflect upon the bankruptcy of ideologies.
What we want, here and now, are simple, elementary 
things. Without reference to any ideological framework,
beyond all ideology. We aspire to a share in the basic values 
of life, those which simple common sense and elementary 
human dignity demand we should be entitled to. Yet what 
have we actually experienced? An attempt to subjugate the 
world to ideology. And what a failure! Perhaps it will make 
the intellectuals realize that it is not enough to construct 
a theory and then twist reality to fit in with it. Alive and
Letter to Freedom. The torches of your 
pupils accompany me throughout the journey 
(1989), collage by the Czech artist Jin Kolar.
Works by Vaclav Havel translated 
into English include:
Plays: The Memorandum, Eyre Methuen, London 
1981; The Vanek Plays trilogy, University of Britisl 
Columbia Press, 1987; Largo Desolato, Faber & Faber 
London/Grove Press, New York, 1987; Tcmptatior, 
Faber & Faber/Grove Press, 1988.
Essays and other writings: Letters to Olga (1979 
1982), a collection of correspondence from prison t  
his wife, Faber 8c Faber, 1983, reissued 1989; Vacla• 
Havel: Or Living in Truth, Faber & Faber, 1987.

mysterious, reality transcends all imaginable theories, plans, 
concepts. To order and organize it calls for humility and 
respect for the richness, the diversity, all the colourful variety 
of life. It is impossible to stretch it out on the Procrustean 
bed of a utopia created by the cold mind of an ideologist. 
But in our part of the world,(this is what has been done. 
It’s a total failure. Hence the mistrust of plans and theories 
on the part of the intellectual in Eastern Europe. Hence 
our desire to stick to analysing the present, which is the best 
way of planning the future.
Do you see any difference between the respective roles of 
intellectuals in the East and in the West?
— The first difference is that, in most of the communist bloc 
countries, even recently, politics, the political debate, seemed 
to have vanished. Totalitarianism banishes politics. Deprived 
of all political culture, society cannot build its natural 
defences, public opinion cannot be born. Politics does not 
even have any professional ground where it can be practised. 
But a strange thing happened. Politics, chased out of the 
door, came back in through the window. It suddenly
December 2001 - The Unescó Courier 13

invaded the whole spectrum of social life. Secretly, every­
thing took on political significance: a concert, a mass, a 
fair.... In such circumstances, the writer’s word acquires 
an extraordinary aura. Especially if he strives to tell the 
truth, without fear of the problems he is bringing down 
on his own head, if he ceases to be the docile interpreter . 
of authority. Why is the writer so important? Because 
the tool with which he works is language, which calls a 
spade a spade, which asks questions. It is the quintessential 
tool of culture. In our country, the writer’s cultural audience 
is on a par with the level of political expectation—immense. 
Many people from the West are struck by this. People 
are desperately eager to hear what is going to be said, ex­
pressed. It is their own hopes, their freedom, which thus 
seem to take shape. It is as though society, through the 
medium of this cultural ferment, becomes varied, structured. 
Writers, upon whose shoulders there weighs a growing 
political responsibility, have to be correspondingly more 
demanding.
Does this desire for change in Eastern Europe and in other 
parts of the world mark the advent of a new era?
^  I’m not a futurologist, nor am I a seer. I do not know 
where the world community is heading. Everywhere, I 
observe the economic, political, ecological signs of a deep- 
seated crisis. In my view, this crisis is an existential crisis* 
a crisis of identity: man has lost the sense of responsibility 
he had previously felt towards something higher than him, 
something which transcended him. There are many men and 
women in the world who have felt it, understood it and who 
are seeking a way out.
Perhaps the end of the millennium will see new perspec­
tives opening up. There are already some encouraging signs: 
a slowing down of the arms race, attempts at peaceful 
co-existence, the Helsinki agreements. Signs which are still 
modest. The most brutal and obvious aspects have already
been tackled. But the most dangerous aspects are precisely 
those which aren’t visible.
Will the gulf between West and East disappear?
E -1  honestly don’t know. The differences between the two 
worlds are so enormous.... For decades, these two systems 
have had a different history. Today, the communist-type 
totalitarian system, which, following the example of the 
communists themselves, I would call “stalinist socialism”, 
has reached stalemate. People are starting to realize this in 
the East. Whence the related efforts to introduce an element 
of democratization, of perestroika. This fact is vitally 
important. The East is taking a step towards the West. Is 
the western world for its part capable of taking a step 
towards its neighbour? I don’t know. The West is defending 
values which are good for humanity as a whole. It has no' 
desire to abandon them and in this it is absolutely right.
I suffer whenever it relinquishes some of them: we subscribe 
to these values too. As for the upheavals which the West 
is experiencing, m§f£-@f these strike me as variants of this 
pj®f$tmd crisis of civilization which I have already referred 
to. The West can only soke these problems by itself.
But there is one serious problem which is commons to 
both systems, and that is excessive centralization. Here, 
political power, the economic levers, energy resources, every­
thing'lies in the same hands. So in fact the state is the sole 
employer, the sole organizer of social life. This is monstrous. 
In the West, though in different forms—increasingly vast 
undertakings, gigantic conglomerates—you find the same 
trend towards total centralization. The result, on both sides, 
is the same “anonymization” of life in general, though of 
course in our case it looks more directly shocking. Human 
links, relations between one person and S th e r ,  are disap­
pearing from the workplace, but also from social life, from 
towns, from homes. The individual is becoming just a cog 
in an immense machine. He is losing all sense of his work 
and of his existence. Both systems ought to be capable of 
overcoming this dehumanizing phenomenon, each in its 
own way. When they nave done so, perhaps they will find 
a way of movfflg closer together...
At this decisive turning point for the future, can intellectuals 
do anything to change the course of events?
— By their very nature, intellectuals are powerless in certain 
fields. They cannot change the world as politicians do. Their 
presence in the world is marked by what they say, they act 
through words. I have written an essay entitled “The power 
of the impotent”, in which I have tried to explain how a 
true word, even when spoken by a siiigJe person, is more 
powerful in certain circumstances than entire divisions of 
soldiers. The word illuminates, awakens, liberates. The word 
also has its power. The intellectuals must hang on to or 
acquire this power of theirs, in order to turn it to advantage. 
They must not desire any other power than this. Let them 
leave the power of immediate transformation or social 
organization to the politicians.

Above, illustration by the French artist Michel Granger for 
the cover of Amnesty International’s annual report, 1987. 
Opposite page, cover design by Gabina Farova for Revolver 
Revue, a Czechoslovakian samizdat publication (1989).
What cause do you think intellectuals should use their 
power to serves’
— On the eve of a new millennium, the most precious 
possession we ought to defend, and which should find unani­
mous support among people everywhere, regardless of their 
country or the system under which they live, is a certain 
number of human qualities, of fundamental values. And 
first of all, humility. Many cruel events which we have 
experienced at the end of this millennium, such as Hitlerism, 
Stalinism or the excesses of Pol Pot, show the vanity, the
arrogance of groups or individuals, of fanatics or non­
fanatics, of ideologues, doctrinaires, Utopians. The arrogance 
of those who think they know how everything ought to 
be, who think they can decide the order of things. When 
reality doesn’t fit in with their theories,, they impose their 
theories and these lead straight to the camps, to massacres, 
to horrendous wars. This lack of humility can also be 
observed elsewhere than in the strict political domain. Pride 
is also at the root of the global ecological crisis: man imposes 
his will upon nature, without respecting her laws, her secrets. 
There is plenty I could say on this subject.... Let us not forget 
the meaning of freedom, of dignity, of justice. And let us 
be more humble. ■
A video film of this interview, by Michel Bongiovanni, was 
made by the Centre International de Création Vidéo, 
Montbéliard-Belfort, France (director Pierre Bongiovanni).
December;
CnRS.NiJeR
a s> s> o
