PHILIPPE DEMENET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST

Pa r t n e rship or purs e - s t r i n g s :
NGOs in the South speak up
Riding on their new-found influence, NGOs in the developing world are increasingly critical of the
stringent conditions imposed on them by richer counterparts. Partnership,
they argue, has to become more than a buzz-word
ver the last decade, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in richer
countries have tried out audacious and
sometimes far-fetched methods to check
how their aid is being spent by recipients
in developing ones.
“ We lent a video camera to a
Ghanaian partner running a fair-trade
p r o j e c t ,” says Chris Roche, p r o g r a m m e
director at the British NGO Oxfam,
which funds more than $130 million
worth of development projects each
y e a r. The Ghanaians did their own
assessment,video camera in hand. The
footage revealed a project agent
embezzling craft workers’ money. “We
call this a participatory self-assessment,
because it allows our partner to get more
involved with the beneficiaries at the
grassroots.”
Other NGOs use peer reviews,
crossed assessments (when partners in
the developing world assess projects in
the North) or consultations via a kind of
travelling parliament. Last spring, M a r c
B e r g e r, programme director at the
French Catholic Committee against
Hunger and for Development (CCFD),
visited three continents to meet
“ p a r t n e r s ” in developing countries.
During a series of seminars he spoke
about the organization, with a budget of
$26 million per annum,and how it goes
about selecting projects.“Our openness
empowered them and made the terms of
our relationship more equal,” he says.
These various methods, which are
still in the pilot stages, aim to rectify the
lopsided relationship between donor
Benin’s Songhai team is training 240 farmers in organic agriculture:“the North arrives with ready-made projects.”

NGOs in the North and their bene-
ficiaries in the South. But invariably,
“the hand that gives is above the one
that receives,” as an African proverb
g o e s. Even after such consultations,
CCFD is still the one which chooses the
projects to fund and the rules to be
imposed.“They’re consulted but in the
end we decide, even though their
opinion can carry weight,” a d m i t s
Berger.
Mounting
dissatisfaction
World Bank figures show that NGOs
have “grown exponentially” over the
past ten years, especially in developing
countries. In India,more than a million
community-based groups are involved in
local development. In Bangladesh, 5 , 0 0 0
organizations are involved in literacy
efforts—so many that a child there is
more likely to learn to read with their
help than via the state education system.
In the former communist countries of
Eastern Europe, 100,000 NGOs sprung
up between 1988 and 1995.
In terms of human development—
health care, education, help in finding
w o r k , social services and emergency
aid—“the role of NGOs in the South
has become key,” says Guillaume
d ’ A n d l a u , a lecturer at Strasbourg’s
Political Studies Institute and author of
a book on humanitarian action.“Even
governments in the North call upon
them for their overseas development
programmes.”
Their influence may be indisputable,
but NGOs in the developing world are
increasingly dissatisfied with the unequal
terms of the relationship. Since the early
1 9 7 0 s, NGOs based in the richer nations
have used the impressive term
“ p a r t n e r s h i p ” to describe their links
with colleagues in the South.The word
“has been part of approved rhetoric in
the ‘development community’ for a very
long time,” according to Gerry
H e l l e i n e r,1 an economics professor at
the University of To r o n t o.“It has rarely
been effectively practised. S o m e
practitioners have long doubted whether
it was possible.”
Delivering results
Far from ebbing away, N o r t h e r n
NGOs are putting increasing pressure
on those in developing countries.
According to Oxfam’s Roche, the idea is
“to get them to increase their
involvement and provide tangible proof
of their effectiveness.”
Novib, a Dutch NGO with a $120-
million annual budget, requires aid
recipients to supply accounts every year,
S o n g h a ï * : the North looks for an echo of its own song
Does partnership mean equality? At Songhai, we don’t think so.
Here, it means complementarity, a shared approach towards a
mission, mutual respect and transparency at all costs. It’s a question
of not letting one side trample over the other.
Unfortunately, the world is far from this ideal.In the South, NGOs are
too often born in a burst of enthusiasm or as a reaction to a problem,
without any long-term strategy. After that, their sole concern is
survival.All too often, there’s a frenetic race to win the attention of
Northern “partners,” gleefully described as “donors.”
NGOs in the South live on a drip: they’re ready to take all the aid they
can find.In a perpetual state of dependency, they don’t try to mobilize
local resources in the field that might help make their projects
sustainable. “White elephants”—abandoned edifices that have cost a
fortune—are the sad result.
The weaknesses on the other side are just as flagrant.Our “partners”
from the North arrive with ready-made projects devised in offices in
London, Paris, Washington and Brussels, with preset conditions and
eligibility criteria. Then they go off searching for people and
institutions to back them up, looking for an echo of their own song as
it were. And they have no problem finding one. Even though their
priorities change all the time—one day it’s environment or gender
equality, the next capacity-building—their Southern “partners” are
ready to change strategy and even their identity simply to satisfy the
Northern “partners.”
Sometimes, though, the latter come across institutions like Songhai,
who have their own ideas and want to preserve their dignity through
mutual respect. This leaves them rather confused. In the past, we’ve
had to return funding already paid into our account, notably to two
religious groups (one Protestant and the other Catholic), and to a
multilateral aid agency.The reason:their goals and conditions were no
longer in line with the vision and strategies that we’d tried in vain to
share with them.
Not all donors have this one-track attitude. Songhai is currently
working with a public international aid organization which, after
seeing how we operated,agreed to give us some leeway in the use of
their funding. All Songhai’s activities and programmes aim to boost
our own resources in order to reduce the amount of aid we receive
from NGOs or aid agencies. We think self-sufficiency is the only way to
sustainable development. ■
* The Beninese NGO Songhai—named after an empire that existed in
the bend of the Niger river in the 15th century—was set up in 1985
by a Catholic priest, Brother Njamuno. It is currently training 240
apprentice farmers at three centres in integrated organic farming
based on making the best use possible of local resources. 

as well as twice-yearly financial
statements and a final report on the
project.“When there’s a problem with
the spending of funds, the local partner
might get a visit from an expert,” says
Jan Ruyssenaars from Novib’s project
d e p a r t m e n t . The organization, w h i c h
d e fines itself as a donor at the service of
Southern NGOs, is far from the fussiest
in the field.
Not all NGOs make the same
d e m a n d s, but there are fewer and fewer
who make none at all and advocate a
hands-off approach,according to Rick
D a v i e s, a social development consultant
based in the UK,who has studied how
donors in general operate. The most
“laissez faire” tend to be Christian
organizations. At the other end of the
spectrum are the hard-liners, such as
the U. S. A g e n cy for International
Development (USAID),which requires
extensive information and the meeting
of set targets akin to a business contract.
Between the two camps are the
m i n i m a l i s t s, who think producing
reports diverts the energy of Southern
NGOs from their most important work.
You also have the “apologetic realists,”
such as Novib and Oxfam. Th o u g h
aware that the reports are a burden,
they need them for their own donors.
“ Without being neo-colonialist,” s a y s
R o c h e,“every time money is disbursed,
we need to know exactly where it goes
out of respect for the British citizens
who give us donations.”
Sending back
the money
The bottom-line is that demands
made by richer NGOs are meeting with
increasing resistance. Some NGOs in
the developing world even return money
to donors who become too
“ d o m i n e e r i n g.”More often, in countries
where several sources of funding are
a v a i l a b l e, they shun donors who are too
bureaucratic or finicky.
“Everyone wants a donor who will
l i s t e n , take time to learn and allow
r o o m for local initiatives,” says Lisa
B o r n s t e i n , a researcher at Natal
U n i v e r s i t y ’s School of Development
S t u d y, in South A f r i c a . Certain NGOs in
the South which accept a more
contractual relationship insist that
funding arrives on time, and that the
donor does not change priorities or
monitoring procedures in the middle of
a project,as often happens.
When asked—and when they dare
speak up—NGOs in the developing
world usually repeat the same lament:
“the North claims to knows what’s best
for us, poses as an expert and doesn’t
take the time to listen or the trouble to
use local skills and resources.”
Passing on
expertise
By the mid-1990s, d o n o r
organizations could already see the
danger of stifling local initiative by being
too heavy-handed.“ The principles that
underpin partnership are incompatible
with the notion of conditionality
imposed by donors,” said the chairman
of the OECD’s development aid
committee at the time.
Conditionality has lost none of its
relevance, whether it relates to gender
e q u a l i t y, environmental protection or
other domains. But the notion is
challenged by NGOs that have several
donors to choose from.“ Fishermen from
the Cape, who are mostly men, didn’t
understand why they had to bring
women into their profession,” s a y s
B o r n s t e i n . “ They complied, but these
conditionalities can lead to absurd
s i t u a t i o n s, just to please the donor.As for
the environment, the deep poverty in
our country still makes it seem like a
luxury.”
To escape this unequal relationship
caused by money transfers, some NGOs
in the South see only one way out:
strengthen their ability to fund
themselves.
The CCFD’s South A f r i c a n ,M e x i c a n
and Chilean partners have said as much.
“You talk to us about self-sufficiency,”
they told Berger, “but why don’t you
pass on to us some of your expertise in
fund-raising and mass-mailing?” ■
1. In UNDP’s magazine C o o p e r a t i o n
South, Number Two, 2000.
Noel A g u i r re Ledezma*:
We can help the North
Our relationship with Northern donors depends largely on the NGO we’re working with.
When mutual understanding is strong, the desire to draw up joint projects arises quite
n a t u r a l l y. These are based on a shared political vision and similar technical and
organizational approaches. When that happens, the discussion is not just about sums of
money or how to handle them. It’s even less about the need to respect the goals of the
project down to the last comma. In this scenario, you’re close to the notion of a true
partnership.
But with other NGOs, the relationship only repeats and underscores the South’s dependence
on the North. In these cases, you only talk about preset criteria for the project’s aims or
management.Everything is seen through Northern eyes, with the unspoken assumption that
“people in the South don’t know how to manage.”
You’ll find these trends in most NGOs in the South. Some are only interested in securing
funds and reducing North-South relations to a straight transfer of money. This has to be
changed. The first question we should ask is what we can build together. How can we help
the North in our own field of competence, whether it’s education,culture or human values?
What networks can we create so that together we don’t just build up a poor part of the
world—the South—but a different world altogether, rooted in fairness and solidarity? ■
* An educator who heads the Bolivian Centre for Educational Research and Action (CBIAE),
an NGO with Dutch, German and Spanish funding.

Zafrullah Chowdhury*: We choose our donors
For the first two years of our existence as an NGO, we didn’t ask
anyone for money. We lived in tents pitched around a clinic and
the peasants would bring us rice. Then Abbé Pierre, from France, gave
us some funding so we could build a house. That was the first money
we received from abroad.
When I went to Europe in the winter of 1972, he told me:“I’d like to
give you more because you’ve done good work. But I have one
condition...” I cut him off at once:“I don’t want your conditions, nor
your money!”
He replied: “I’ll show you Paris.” And one freezing cold night, he
showed me “his” Paris—places where the poor were being given
soup and sheds where the
Companions of Emmaüs were
restoring abandoned furniture to
raise money. I realized that he and I
belonged to the same world despite
our language differences.
Then he said:“Here’s the condition.
Never forget that I’m giving you the
money of the poor to help the poor
of Bangladesh. Always make sure
they’re the ones who truly benefit.”
Thirty years later, we still ask
ourselves that question: “Will it
help the poorest people?” This is
what Abbé Pierre taught us and I
still remember that. Conditionality
is not a bad thing, as long as it’s
founded on an ethic and favours
human development. The problem
comes when Western donors set
poor conditions.
An example: child labour in the
Bangladeshi textile industry is
indefensible and I’m against it. But
should it be simply banned, with its
abolition made a condition of
foreign aid? I don’t think so. This is
how the question should be looked
at: what will happen to all the girls
between 10 and 14 when they no longer work in the textile industry?
They may become prostitutes or end up as slaves in a rich person’s
house. They certainly won’t go to school, because the prices you pay
in the North for the clothes made in these factories don’t allow their
mothers to earn a decent wage. It would be better for the child to
keep on working and go to classes in the evening, paid for by the
mill-owner or a foreign NGO.
At our People’s Health Centre, we choose our foreign donors. The first
thing we tell them is that we prepare our programmes and budgets.
Then we tell them we have two “conditions.” The first is that donors
have to recognize that they know nothing about Bangladesh, and
that I know the country better than they do. Then they have to be
patient, because development is a slow process. That’s why I ask
them for long-term funding, of at least five years.
In the first year, the donor listens to us and learns. The second year,
we discuss and negotiate. And because we know they’re accountable
to the body that provided the money—a worthy concern—the third
year is given over to checking that every cent of the aid is used well.
In the fourth year, disputes will most likely arise. But by the fifth year,
we’ll understand each other better. We’ll even begin to see where
we’ve succeeded, and where we haven’t.
Five years is the time it takes to build a relationship of mutual
understanding and friendship. But that’s not enough. We also have to
get out of this “secrecy illness”
that donors bring with them (the
World Bank and the Northern
NGOs alike) and which has
poisoned NGOs in the South. Who
knows how much money has been
handed over, to whom and for
what? Secrecy breeds corruption.
We’re the only NGO in Bangladesh
that posts details of our wages and
financial statements in our local
health centres. Because we are
accountable to the people we serve
before anyone else.
Transparency starts there. A f t e r
that,with the Northern NGOs, it’s a
matter of mutual respect and trust.
If we’re dealing with a donor who
understands us and believes in
human development, I’ve no
objection to him or her examining
our accounts. But that person has
to recognize my right to examine
theirs. ■
* A Bangladeshi doctor who
founded Gonoshasthaya Kendra
(GK), the People’s Health Centre,
whose 2,000 employees, mostly
women, promote primary health care, education and female
empowerment in Bangladesh. The NGO trains its own paramedics
(primary health workers) and manufactures antibiotics and generic
medicines. It provides two-thirds of its own funding.
A paramedic on duty in a Bangladeshi village.
