BOUBA AND JACQUES
THE BIRTH OF A D I A L O G U E  
BETWEEN A F R I C A  & EUROPE
Over the signature of Bouba, the schoolchildren of Pitoa (Cameroons) 
began an exchange of letters a few years ago. with Jacques and the 
schoolchildren of Costes-Gozon, a tiny village in southern France. They 
wrote of their work, their games, and their everyday life. The letters 
became part of the reading and writing programmes of both schools 
(See page 5). Each week they were read, explained, discussed and reco­
pied. In this way the Boubas of Africa and the Jacques of Europe 
contributed to a better understanding of each other. Their efforts have 
resulted in a delightful and informative little book Notre Ami Jacques 
(Our Friend Jacques) published by the Club African du Livre, at Pitoa, 
from which the passages on the following pages have been selected.
Pitoa (Cameroons), October 1.
My dear friend Jacques,
I  am very happy to be writ­
ing to you. My name is Bouba 
and my father’s name is Cadji. 
He grows millet. I  chase away 
the birds and the monkeys 
from his crops and I tend his 
herd of goats. I  have a sister called Djenabou and a  little 
brother whose name is Oumar. My mother grinds the 
millet, crushes the ground nu ts and sweeps out the hut. 
I ¡hope you and your parents are well. Goodbye for now 
and I  hope to  hear from you soon.
Your friend: BOUBA.
Costes-Gozon (France)
October 1.
My dear friend Bouba,
My name is Jacques Lacroix. 
My fa th e r is a  farm er. He has 
a ftdek of 30 sheep and four 
pigs. My m other looks after  
the house, cleans it, prepares 
the meals does the washing and helps my fath er in the  
fields.
I  have a  brother called Maurice an d  two sisters, 
Jeanette and  Leonie.
I’m glad I  can w rite to you an d  I  hope you are  well.
Your friend: JACQUES.

T H I S  I S  MY  H O M E
BOURA: In  June, w;hen the school closes I shall 
walk down the hill towards my village, very happy to 
see my home again.
All around it  are young cotton plants, com and 
millet. I t  has a straw roof which keeps it  fresh and 
cool. The side which looks out on the road has a veran­
dah. The second side has a window but as it  is unpro­
tected, it is always drenched during the rainy season. 
The third side also has a verandah held up by two open 
brick walls. This is where my father quietly sits sewing 
his clothes. We also eat our meals there and sleep out 
a t night during the hot season.
I shall be glad to sleep in  the house where I  was born.
JACQUES: My home seems to hang on a red and  
green hillside: brick-red soil and green alfalfa and  
young corn. The house is built of stone covered by 
rough-cast plaster. The walls are pink and the tiled 
roof is covered with moss. Some grey and white pigeons 
circle overhead and with a fluttering of wings land on 
the stone-edged pigeon-house.
In  another building on the fa r side of th e  stone 
courtyard are the bam , the sheep-pen, the stable and 
the pigsty.
In  an open shed leaning against a wall my father  
keeps his cart and his binder. In  the same shed is the 
sling in  which we pu t the ox when it is being shod.
tftiV  jQ ’a iJ lM ., J faA ynjsgH  _____ 
Jy n t  -&» fjfflrvne& iicpie- Cfu&nd,
\ ont Jit font dm
BAL L  AND WH I S T L E
BOUBA: We’ve decided to make a ball. Armed with 
knives we go off to the river bank. The sap from the 
trees here is like the latex of rubber trees. We make 
a gash in  a tree and the sap starts  to flow. I  cover 
one of my thumbs with the sap which starts to harden. 
To get a thicker layer we add some manioc flour. Then 
we let some of the sap run on to Abbo’s stomach. The 
sap spreads out and solidifies. I  go and fetch a hollow 
reed stem. I take off the latex from my thumb and 
have a small cylinder. With the hollow stem I blow 
into it  and the latex swells up until It makes a sphere 
about eight inches across. To give i t  a  thicker sur­
face, I  spread on it  the sap which covers Abbo’s sto­
mach. Finally the skin of the bladder we have made 
is nearly half an inch thick. We go back to  the village 
very pleased with ourselves and in  the evening we play 
with the ball.
JACQUES; I  am  guarding the pigs in  the chestnut 
grove. I  pick out a new, straight, smooth branch and 
1 cut a  piece from it about six inches long and about 
as thick as my thumb. Halfway down I  cut into the  
bark just down to the wood. With the handle of , my 
knife I  tap very lightly on the bark and  with, a  twisting 
movement I  slide it  carefully from the wood. About 
half an inch, from the end of the bare wood and in the 
centre, I  cut a  triangular notch, and from here to the  
end of the wood I  cut out a narrow shaving. I  wet the 
wood with saliva and slide back the tube of bark over 
it. Now I cut out of the bark a  piece half an inch long 
and a quarter of an inch wide above the first hole I  
made in  the wood. My whistle is ready. I  blow it and 
keep blowing, blowing, blowing.
►

N I G H T  F I S H I N G  
WI T H  S T I C K  
A ND T O R C H
BOUBA: Wheta. it has. got dark 
Nohou, the man with the powerful 
voice, cries: “Let all those who have 
eaten their fill, who are full of 
strength and courage, come fishing 
with me; let all those who are still 
hungry stay here to wash the 
cooking pots of their mothers and 
their brides-to-be.”
Picking up sticks, matches and 
torches of dried grass, we run to 
join him.
At the river’s edge we light our 
torches and wade out until the 
water is up to our thighs.
Mamadou and I fish together. A 
fish, lured by the light, comes close. 
It seems dazzled and stays quite 
still. With a quick blow from his 
stick, Mamadou stuns the fish. I 
grab it easily and put it into a 
gourd.
Suddenly I see a big catfish. This 
time I hit out and stun the fish. 
But my stick breaks in two.
Then I see another big fish and 
am just about to grab it when 
Mamadou hits my hand. I start 
crying and to comfort me, Mama­
dou gives me half his catch.
■ * 3  m H A R V E S T  T I ME
BOUBA: In the field the ears of 
millet are drooping towards the 
ground and the stems are bent. I t  is 
harvest time.
My father gives 15 bowls of millet 
to my mother. She grinds It into flour 
and  makes a  meal for the labourers. 
My father kills a  goat. When these 
preparations are finished, my fa ther,’ 
goes to borrow some machetes. He 
warns thé neighbours th a t there is 
work to be done and. then he goes to 
see the witch-doctor. The next day 
work begins. With their machetes, 
the men cut the stalks a few inches 
above the soil. They’ lay them out 
on the ground in  parallel rows. I t  is 
hard  work, but the rhythm  of a tom­
tom helps to keep them a t it.
We children follow the harvesters, 
chewing millet stems as though they 
were sugar cane.
Three days later, the women cut off 
the ears from the stalks and carry 
away the ears in large baskets to the 
place where they will be threshed.
JACQUES: The oxen are pulling 
the harvest.er-binder. I grease it well,, 
put in a good supply of string and  
prepare a  reserve supply and a  spare 
blade.
My fa th er leads the oxen. Robert 
is in  the driving seat; with a  lever he  
can raise or lower the blade according 
to th e  cut he wishes to make.
The oxen pull hard. The cutting  
blade rattles in  its frame, the drum  
squeaks as it turns, th e  belts carry  
th e  wheat up to the binder which 
gives a  bang a s  each sheaf is tied; 
the sheaf carrier tilts as Robert pres­
ses a  pedal, and the sheaves fall.
Mother and I  stack the sheaves in 
lines. The thistles prick our fingers.
ANGLERS WITH A TRIDENT
JACQUES : When my fath er and my uncle were 
schoolchildren, they would leave home early in the morn­
ing so as to be able to go fishing before classes began.
Usually about a  dozen boys went down to the stream  
to fish with a  trident.
A few of the boys kept watch in case th e  gamekeeper 
should pass th a t way. Two others had an iron trident 
attached to a  long stick. They went carefully towards 
the water and when they saw a  trout motionless just 
above the bed of the stream, their trident flashed into 
the water. Impaled by the prongs, the fish fought madly. 
But they quickly had it  out on the bank and in a  twink­
ling it  v m s  hidden in a  satchel between the schoolbooks 
and the sandwiches.
Then these young rascals went to a  place well hidden 
by thick bushes and made a  fire on which to cook their 
catch. How good it  tasted.
Sometimes they were late  for school and when the  
teacher scolded them, they replied, timidly: “We had to 
help with the chores a t home."
