Cooking in
a cro s s fire
Alain Senderens, one of
France’s top chefs,
creates dishes for a
cosmopolitan elite, but
worries that the
dwindling of true
homemade cooking is
slowly killing off our
tastebuds
s cuisine becoming globalized,
like everything else?
I t ’s commonplace to say
that we’re living in a multi-
cultural society, in which eve-
rything is interconnected.
Wh a t ’s m o r e, the transportation
revolution is a fact.So globalizing cur-
rents are running through cuisine, just as
they are through all other sectors of
every society. But cooking is not beco-
ming globalized, if by globalization you
mean imposing a single model everyw-
here around the world.
In Antiquity, Pliny the Elder wrote
that Greek gourmets travelled around
the Mediterranean basin to sample the
freshest products at their prime, rather
than have them shipped to Greece. B u t
of course those goods were already tra-
v e l l i n g. To d a y, we get perfectly fresh
produce from Japan and Au s t r a l i a .A n o-
ther example: in New Yo r k ’s Little Italy,
you can find better-quality Italian pro-
ducts than those that are widely avai-
lable in Italy itself. In the United States,
pizza is the best-selling dish.In France,
it’s couscous.
So you’re opening your cuisine up to the
world?
I draw tremendous inspiration from
Asian cuisine. In 1978, I became the
first chef to introduce soy sauce into
gourmet cooking, a n d , by the way, a
food critic ripped me to shreds. In 1978,
I spent two months in China to study
Chinese cuisine: it has some very fine
things but is still highly conservative.
Thai cuisine, on the other hand, i n s p i r e s
me a lot because it’s very hot and spicy.
I’ve just put tempura, a typically Japa-
nese way of preparing fried foods,on my
menu.I would never have done that 10
or 20 years ago. But I’ve concocted my
own version by adding in some curry
A l a in S e n de re n s
Delving into Grandma’s cookbooks can also be a source of inspiration.
* Since 1978,Alain Senderens,6 1 ,has been among the 20 or so great chefs that restaurant
guides rank in cooking’s elite. In 1985,he took over Lucas Carton’s restaurant on the
Place de la Madeleine in Pa r i s, where he honed his specialty,“creative cooking.”T h e
business has 68 full-time employees, including 24 cooks, and serves approximately
60 lunches and slightly more dinners every day, at a price that can easily exceed 1,000
francs ($150) per person.
* Alain Senderens has written many cookbooks, and he is also the author of Proust -
La cuisine retrouvée ( “ P r o u s t , cuisine regained”), published by Chêne, 1 9 9 1 , a
gourmet’s view of the French literary masterpiece.
I

“Can a t h re e - s t a r F rench re s t a u rant get away
with serving an American wine?”

and serving it with Condrieu, a white
wine from the Rhône valley.
Recently, a quarrel between some great
F rench chefs pitted the advocates of
openness to the world against the defen-
ders of tradition.You were firmly on the
side of the former.
At the time, I made a comparison
with Picasso. Imagine seeing his works
when the debate over them was in full
s w i n g. Some people would have said,
“ h e ’s not a great painter,h e ’s inspired by
African art.”The argument in cooking
is exactly the same.They say all our pro-
ducts and recipes must remain French!
It’s unbelievable!
But how far should cultural mixing go?
I specialize in creating dishes to
marry with my favourite wines. M a n y
vintners outside France are willing to
pay me to put their wine on the menu
and invent a dish to go with it.I haven’t
done that yet for two reasons. Fi r s t , I
h a v e n ’t found any outstanding wines,
such as American ones for example.Yo u
might ask, what makes a great wine?
Th a t ’s a highly subjective notion.Wi n e s
from the New World are very powerful,
very concentrated, and a little heavy,
whereas I like delicate, elegant wines as
feminine as lace, ones that make me
want to have another glass. I wouldn’t
say there aren’t any great wines outside
Fr a n c e, but they’re scarce and certainly
very expensive. S e c o n d ,and this is essen-
t i a l , I’m faced with a dilemma: can a
three-star Fr e n ch restaurant get away
with serving an American wine?
Aren’t the great chefs creating a cuisine
that would satisfy “world taste”? Wo u l d
a Brazilian, an American,a Japanese, an
African and a Frenchman appreciate your
dishes in the same way?
Yes and no. Let’s go back to pain-
t i n g. An enlightened—and wealthy
—art lover travels to all the art capi-
t a l s, opening up to a host of styles.Th a t ’s
what my clientele is like.They are a tiny
minority you meet in very few places.
I believe in gastronomic meridians.
Paris, like New York,Los Angeles and
perhaps London, is exceptional because
its cuisine is universal.Anyone can enjoy
quality dishes from their own culture.
But everywhere else, including in major
French cities, a kind of regional protec-
tionism lives on.
To answer your question, I ’ m
convinced that there are some French
dishes a Korean or a Japanese person
w o u l d n ’t like. Classicism is omnipresent
outside our very tiny minority, because
even when we travel, we yearn for our
roots and want to return to them.Th a t ’s
why there’s no globalization of taste:
i t ’ll take at least a hundred years before
that happens. It’s one of the things that
changes the slowest. And please don’t
talk to me about the wave of McDo-
nald’s: in a capital city like Paris, they
account for less than five percent of the
restaurant trade and people go to them
mainly because that’s all they can afford.
And yet “ t ra d i t i o n a l ” cooking is dying
out.
Ye s, except for a few pockets of
r e s i s t a n c e, w h a t ’s called “ b o u r g e o i s
c u i s i n e ” or “la cuisine du terroir” i s
giving up ground, quite simply because
w o m e n ’s roles are changing in our socie-
ties.When they come home from work
in the evening, they don’t have time to
prepare a veal stew for the family, so
they buy ready-made dishes. Sales of
those kinds of products are soaring by
about 45 percent a year at the super-
market chain I work for. Far, very far
from the cuisine of the great chefs, cui-
sine has gone from the home realm to
industry.That’s a serious problem.
Why?
In the years to come,I’m afraid there
will be a loss of taste. Our generation
had a culinary history, a family cooking.
As children, we already knew some-
thing about cuisine. Today, the overw-
helming majority of the population
doesn’t have that knowledge. They’re
willing, or doomed,to eat anything.
If somebody earns the minimum
w a g e, has one or two children in school,
and has the rent to pay, w h a t ’s left to buy
food? Th e y ’re doomed to the bottom of
the market, to standardized, u n i f o r m
products that marketing people have
designed to be sold in hundreds of mil-
lions of copies, packed with artific i a l
flavours to bring down the price.We’re

entering a period of two-tiered cuisine:
a minority—let’s say 10 percent of the
population—can afford our restaurants
or our creations sold in supermarkets,
and 90 percent can only afford mass-dis-
tributed industrial products.
Wh e reas some time ago, the chicken you
served was the same as what we had
for Sunday dinner.
Earlier, products were not standar-
dized —a lot was left up to chance. But
it’s also true that when people criticize
hormone-fed chickens, they forget that
in years past, many families couldn’t
traditional cuisine anymore, a l t h o u g h
we didn’t have any “political” ulterior
motives.
Did nouvelle cuisine revolutionize the
production of your ingredients?
For us, the simpler the cuisine, the
more exceptional the quality of the
ingredients must be. In the 1970s, w h e n
nouvelle cuisine e m e r g e d , drawing so
much criticism at the time, we went to
see farmers to ask them to supply us
with exceptional products. Thanks to
us, pockets of high-quality production
formed at a time when intensive indus-
trial production was becoming wides-
p r e a d .Well before the outbreak of mad
cow disease, the great chefs saved tra-
ditional products and launched what
later came to be known as organic pro-
duce. We were on the cutting-edge of
ecology without knowing it.The Fr e n c h
researcher Claude Fi s h l e r1 said that
with nouvelle cuisine, people set out in
search of paradise lost, while in tradi-
tional cuisine, they drowned products in
sauces that masked the taste because
they thought they were mightier than
nature.
Could nouvelle cuisine have come about
without technological innovations?
They were also a decisive factor.
They enable our products to arrive
incredibly fresh. And what can I say
about the benefits of these advances on
afford chicken at all.And quantity isn’t
always incompatible with quality: if a
champagne producer invests enough
money, he can put 50 million very good
bottles on the market every year.
Nouvelle cuisine, which emphasized pro-
ducts in their own right,emerged in the
1 9 7 0 s, right after the protest movements
of the 1960s. Do you think there ’s a
connection between the two?
I think the general social climate
has an influence on all of us. I opened
my own restaurant on April 2,1968.In
1 9 6 8 ,I , like other chefs,d i d n ’t want to do
Is a chicken in every pot compatible with quality? Yes, say some.

“F i rst you eat with the e y e, then comes the t o u c h
in your m o u t h, the s m e l l, and lastly the t a s t e”
frozen food! Even fire, with all its sym-
bolism,has changed. For centuries, we
cooked with charcoal, and later, g a s.
Then electricity came along.The fla m e,
the symbol of male sexuality, fell out of
use just when women were asserting
sexual equality.Th a t ’s an extraordinary
p h e n o m e n o n .And today’s vacuum pac-
king could evoke voyages to the stars.
I t ’s enough to turn you into a philo-
sopher.
Once it was said you could judge top
chefs by how well they used leftovers.
To d a y ’s great chefs take pride in ke e-
ping nothing from one meal to the next.
Haven’t they gone from economy to was-
tefulness?
We work mornings for lunch and
afternoons for dinner. We do every-
thing over twice a day, including baking
the bread. We do haute cuisine, l i k e
designers who do haute couture, a n d
God knows there’s plenty of waste in
the latter… Our clientele expects the
best because we’re very expensive, so
we go all out. But 100 years ago, t h e
finest products were for the best houses
only, the average person didn’t eat the
same things.You can outlaw luxury and
Rolls Royces and only make Minis, b u t
is it democratic to bring everybody
down to the same level in society,
without even leaving them the chance
to dream?
So nouvelle cuisine has become a luxury.
There are gastronomic moments,
just as you don’t go to the opera or to a
museum every day, or read a literary
masterpiece every night. In my view
t h e y ’re more powerful than all the
others because haute cuisine includes all
the other arts.A painting appeals to the
sense of sight,music to hearing,a l t h o u g h
the beat may sometimes make you want
to move. In gastronomy, first you eat
with the eye, then comes the sense of
touch in your mouth, the sense of smell
a n d , lastly the sense of taste.The sensa-
tion is all-encompassing.
So cuisine has risen to the rank of the
eighth art?
N o, because it’s always brought
down to a minor art. When I ask intel-
lectuals to explain why, they say that
cuisine is ephemeral, the work is des-
t r o y e d . But today we have recipes so
precise that ingredients are measured to
the last gram. They can be identically
reproduced the same way as a piece of
music on a record.
Another problem is that most people
cannot intellectually analyze cooking
the way they would painting or litera-
ture.They don’t have the vocabulary to
describe what gives them pleasure or
not. Instead, they just settle for saying
“its good”or “it’s not good.” From that
m o m e n t , the product, the wine, the dish,
dies a quiet death,for nothing. There’s
a lack of culinary culture.
You claim the status of an artist, even
going so far as wanting to patent your
recipes.
To me, everything that’s classic
belongs in the public domain.But today
manufacturers make dishes based on
my latest recipes. I don’t think that’s
f a i r.As soon as a journalist has an excel-
lent meal at my restaurant,everybody
tries to copy me without even knowing
how to, and consequently often do a
bad job.Obtaining intellectual property
rights is the necessary condition for
making sure the recipe is correctly
repeated and the dish keeps its origi-

nality.
But a painting or a film can be admired by
millions of people, whereas your dishes
are accessible only to a tiny minority.
Yes and no, because I also carry out
a social mission. The great chefs have
their ready-to-cook meals just as the
great designers have their ready-to-
wear lines. The vacuum-packed meals
that I make for a major distributor are
an example. Of course, they can’t be
compared with what I do in my restau-
r a n t . But on the other hand, it would be
difficult for someone at home to pro-
duce such good value for money,
because they cost between 18 a n d
3 0 French francs ($2.50 and $4.50). I
give the pleasure of taste back to those
who no longer have time to cook.
Do you agree with the saying “you are
what you eat”?
The anthropologist Claude Lévi-
Strauss is even more specific than
G o e t h e, who supposedly coined the
p h r a s e. He asserts that “a society’s cui-
sine subconsciously translates its struc-
t u r e, u n l e s s, without knowing it, it is
resigned to revealing its contradictions.”
My profession and my family culture
make me a man of the past,but I also
try to be part of our times.We’re going
through a transition period, the birth of
a new civilization and the end of the one
that has ruled for 2,000 years. U n f o r t u-
nately, we only have words, ideas and
our past culture, which are insufficient
for imagining the world of tomorrow.
That contrast probably explains why,
like many people today, I’m in an awk-
ward position,especially since, one or
two years ago, a customer told me,
“Monsieur Senderens,when the Romans
started erecting statues of their cooks,
everything started going downhill very
fast for them…” ■
INTERVIEW BY RENÉ LEFORT
DIRECTOR OF THE UNESCO COURIER
1 . Claude Fisch l e r, r e s e a r cher at the Fr e n ch
National Centre for Scientific Research ,i s
the author of L’Homnivore, 1990, Odile
Jacob, Paris.
“As children, we already knew something about cuisine.”
