MICHEL BESSIÈRES
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Global wa r m i n g :
ignorance is not bliss
At the seventh international climate conference that opens in Bonn, Germany on July 16, scientists
will confirm their alarming forecasts while political leaders are likely to give them the cold shoulder.
Why?
ince the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio, n i n e
years of negotiations on global warming
have led virtually nowhere. Yet some-
thing has changed: the scientific com-
munity has gained extensive knowledge
about the scope and causes of global
warming, putting them in a more legiti-
mate position than ever to alert gov-
e r n m e n t s. M e a n w h i l e, public opinion is
paying increasing attention to the
p r o b l e m . B u t , as Benjamin Dessus, a
French expert and member of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change
( I P C C ) ,w r i t e s :“ w e ’re standing before a
real paradox: public will is still falling
s h o r t , as though knowledge cripples
action instead of prompting it.”
Global warming is no longer a
matter of controversy.The 20th century
recorded the highest temperatures in
1,000 years, with an average increase of
0 . 6 ° C. The last two decades were the
hottest of the 1900s.
A series of phenomena accompa-
nies rising temperatures. For example,
almost all the world’s glaciers have
s h r u n k , while the thickness of the polar
ice cap has decreased by 40 percent
(from 3.1 to 1.8 metres) in 50 years.
Scientists have yet to establish clear
links between global warming and the
increase in natural disasters such as
droughts, storms and floods. But as the
French physicist Hervé Le Treut says,
these episodes “illustrate what might
happen if global warming continues.”
Is the current warming part of the
cyclical phases that the planet has always
e x p e r i e n c e d , or have greenhouse gas
Nepalese police check what’s coming out of the exhaust in Katmandu,one of Asia’s most polluted cities.

emissions resulting from human activi-
ties created new conditions? Almost all
experts now defend the second hypoth-
e s i s. Atmospheric levels of the main
greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide (CO2),
are steadily on the rise, increasing from
280 parts per million (ppm) at the dawn
of the industrial revolution to over 360
ppm today. Forecasters say the fig u r e
will climb to between 540 and 970 ppm
by the late 21st century.
Drought
and disease
The scientific community has been
sounding the alarm for a long time.Th e
first world climate conference took place
in Geneva in 1979.Nine years later, the
World Meteorological Organization and
the United Nations set up the IPCC, a n
international network of over 3,000
researchers and experts that published
reports in 1990, 1995 and 2001, e a c h
more alarming than the last. When the
latest one came out in early 2001, K l a u s
To e p f e r,director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, said that “ t h e
scientific consensus now sounds the
alarm in all the world’s capitals.”
The new report upwardly revised
previous forecasts, predicting that tem-
peratures will climb between 1.4 and
5.8°C by 2100—an increase that has been
“unprecedented for 10,000 years”—and
that ocean levels will rise between 10
and 90 centimetres.The report’s second
section focuses on global warming’s eco-
nomic and social consequences. A r e a s
where cholera and malaria are endemic
will spread, harvests will decrease in
tropical and sub-tropical regions and
drought will strike arid and semi-arid
zones more frequently.
Global warming will worsen the
imbalance between north and south
because it will have a greater impact on
poor countries, and because “those with
the least resources have the lowest
ability to adapt.” By 2050,according to
e s t i m a t e s, the world’s population will
have grown by three billion people to
reach nine billion inhabitants, and elec-
tricity consumption will be 1.5 to 2.7
times higher than it is now. The fossil
fuels responsible for the greenhouse
effect will still account for 75 to 80 per-
cent of total energy consumption,
nuclear power four to seven percent
and renewable sources (wind, sun and
water) 20 percent at best.
A number of climate-related changes
are expected (models do not exist for
these phenomena at the present time).
The most alarming one involves ocean
c u r r e n t s, which are responsible for tem-
perature exchanges between the planet’s
cold and hot regions. Two Swiss
r e s e a r c h e r s, Thomas Stocker and
Andreas Schmittner, say that the Gulf
Stream—the circulation of current in
the North Atlantic—could be inter-
rupted when atmospheric CO2 l e v e l s
reach 750 ppm. That is precisely the
figure that forecasters say will be
reached during the course of the 21st
century.
Specialists suggest combining tech-
nological solutions to stabilize green-
house gas emissions. They range from
using more efficient devices (low-voltage
l a m p s, for example) to developing cogen-
eration (the combined production of
heat and electricity) and using renewable
energy sources such as solar and wind
p o w e r. Industry has already cut its emis-
sions worldwide (they still account for 19
percent of the total), but transportation
has increased them by 75 percent.
Dessus says that the future depends
less on technological breakthroughs
than on priorities when choosing infra-
structures. Put simply, will the Chinese
and Indians choose the automobile or
the train civilization? A n d , he adds,
debate over transportation infrastruc-
tures must apply to energy and telecom-
munications networks as well. It is better
to invest in small fossil energy deposits
(coal or oil) intended for local con-
s u m p t i o n , which would be more energy-
e f ficient than setting up heavy infra-
s t r u c t u r e s, even if they are used for
transporting cleaner energy.
Symbolic targets
Of course,scientists realize that their
role is not to make political decisions.A t
the 1992 Rio summit, the participating
countries signed the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
C h a n g e.This document is based on two
p r i n c i p l e s : economic development in
southern countries must not be ham-
pered, and gas concentrations must be
stabilized at levels that will not danger-
ously disrupt the climate. I n d u s t r i a l i z e d
countries were asked to make an effort.
The 156 nations that ratified the con-
v e n t i o n , including the United States
despite its recent shift into reverse, are
still bound by their signature.
Since then, six conferences on the
climate have tried to make headway.
The only specific commitment dates
back to the 1997 Kyoto Conference,
when the industrialized countries gave
themselves until 2012 to cut their green-
house gas emissions by 5.2 percent.Th e
convention will not enter into force until
it is ratified by at least 55 countries
A study of the Antarctic ice cap of Vostok shows a close correlation,over 400,000years, between levels of
atmospheric gases and surface temperatures.
Carbon dioxide (ppmv)
Gap with current temperatures (°C)
Methane (ppbv)
– 400000 – 300000 – 200000 – 100000 0
Age (year before present)

accounting for 55 percent of emissions.
So far only 33 nations, all from the devel-
oping world, have ratified the protocol.
France is the only industrialized nation
preparing to follow suit. M o r e o v e r, n o
major polluter has met its target.France,
for example, was supposed to stabilize its
emissions, but they have already risen by
two percent.
These targets, which have only a sym-
bolic meaning for the environ-
m e n t , were supposed to usher in a
new period of political commit-
m e n t .They will not be met.The six
international climate conferences
that have taken place over the
past nine years can be considered
f a i l u r e s.As observers have stated,
each country has put its national
interests fir s t ,buckling under pres-
sure from corporate lobbies. P r e s-
ident George W. Bush’s decision
to renounce the Kyoto Protocol is
a telling example. C o m m e n t a t o r s
have pointed out that his polit-
ical career, like that of vice-pres-
ident Dick Cheney, has long been
linked to the U.S. oil industry.
Thinking in millennia
In Fr a n c e, the government
coalition of socialists, greens and
communists has withdrawn its
planned ecotax on industry con-
sumption of fossil fuels one year
before the June 2002 legislative
elections, showing that the brisk
pace of democratic politics is out
of step with the slow rate of plan-
etary changes.The oft-mentioned
precautionary principle is still
given lip service. “Every serious
attempt to tackle the greenhouse
effect will have immediate costs, w h e r e a s
the benefits won’t be apparent for a long
t i m e,” writes John W.A n d e r s o n , an A m e r-
ican environmental journalist with
Resources for the Future. “To the extent
that these potential benefits boil down to
a catastrophe that might not occur, their
impact will never be obvious. The costs,
however, are.”
Only negotiations on nuclear weapons
can compare with the scope and gravity of
the current climate talks. With the fir s t ,
h o w e v e r, there was a sense of urgency.
When it comes to global warming, i t ’s as if
solutions to curtail the problem can be
put off until later. In the meantime, g r e e n-
house gases are accumulating in the air.
Even if emissions were reduced,it would
take years (between 50 and 50,000
depending on the type of gas) for them
to disappear from the atmosphere. As
IPCC president Robert Watson has
stated,“the time it takes to check envi-
ronmental damage can’t be measured in
years or decades, but in centuries and
m i l l e n n i a .” This inertia—combined
with the accumulation of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere—should be
taken as a motivation for immediate
action.But the opposite has happened.
Negotiators wrongly interpret it as an
additional respite.
The discussions that began in Ky o t o
on trading “polluting credits”is a good
illustration of that viewpoint. Th e
“umbrella group” (the United States,
Au s t r a l i a , New Zealand, Japan and
Russia) has imposed the idea of market
transactions by creating the right to
purchase pollution credits from coun-
tries falling short of their quota,and to
borrow against their future quotas.
Behind this approach lies the idea that
technological innovation and the
m a r k e t ’s creative capacity will provide
solutions in time. Seen from that angle,
countries see no point in imposing
heavy legal constraints on themselves.
As President Clinton said,“the Amer-
ican way of life is not negotiable.”
A plea for equity
The industrialized countries have
the tacit conviction that market-driven
technological progress will provide the
a n s w e r s.That is why they tend to reason
in terms of tons of CO2 per
share of GDP.
For example, the Chinese
release 3.93 tons of CO2 into
the atmosphere per $100 of
GNP produced, A m e r i c a n s
and Germans 4.6 and 7.7
times less, respectively. Seen
from the developed coun-
tries’ point of view, t h e i r
model of energy efficiency is
the best. Why should it be
changed? 
On the other hand,devel-
oping countries and many
non-governmental organiza-
tions argue that international
negotiations make no sense
unless they are grounded in
e q u i t y.That is why they would
rather base calculations of
C O2 emissions on the number
of inhabitants. Anil Agarwal,
of the Centre for Science and
Environment in Delhi (India),
has figured that a single A m e r-
ican releases as much green-
house gas as 25 Indians, 3 3
P a k i s t a n i s, 85 Sri Lankans, 1 2 5
Bangladeshis and 500
N e p a l e s e. He suggests allo-
cating the same emissions
quota to every human being.
This is where the public debate
comes up against humanity’s oldest
moral dilemma. Should a tree be judged
by its fruit, as implied by the U. S.
p o s i t i o n , which emphasizes energy
efficiency? Or on the contrary, should
the same rights be granted to all,
a s Agarwal argues? It is doubtful
t h e i s s u e will be settled at the Bonn
conference. ■
A lake near Bhopal (India),dried up by the current heat wave.
