Japanese society is facing what you’ve
called an outbreak of “ u n p redictable vio-
l e n c e ” by high school students. Could you
explain?
It started in 1998 when, in the first
incident of its kind since the end of
World War II,a teacher was stabbed to
death by a 14-year-old boy. Then a
schoolboy who belonged to a gang stole
about $200,000 and a 17-year- o l d
hijacked a bus,killing the woman he had
taken hostage.Another youth,who had
been bullied, battered two fellow-pupils
with a baseball bat before going home
and killing his own mother. We had
2 2 incidents like this between 1998
and2000.
How has the public reacted?
With shock and fear. Parents feel
they no longer understand their own
c h i l d r e n . But this isn’t the first time the-
re’s been violence in or around schools.
There was another wave of it in the
1 9 8 0 s, which the government cracked
down on by hiring teachers who were
skilled at karate, judo or kendo.The aim
was to put pressure on unruly pupils,
who mostly operated in gangs, so that
classes could go on in peace.
Did this include using force?
Corporal punishment used to be
common throughout Japanese society.
But after World War II, the government
put an end to it.So offic i a l l y, such punish-
ment is forbidden, but in fact such
methods were used in schools in the
1980s, after children had received war-
nings.
Did it have any effect?
It set up a vicious circle:the repres-
sive atmosphere only increased the
sense of frustration and stress felt by
difficult children, and tension built up.
The repressed feelings exploded with
an ever greater violence, and the state
cracked down again.A l s o, the “ n o r m a l ”
children began to see this strong-fisted
p o l i cy as the example that had to be fol-
lowed.It was strictly applied (with tea-
chers even searching school bags and
confiscating snacks), until it finally
became unbearable. On the surface,
calm has been reestablished. But since
1 9 9 0 ,t h e r e ’s been an increase in physical
and psychological bullying, e s p e c i a l l y
among girls, along with extortion and
truancy.
And all this in an education system that
puts children under great pressure...
The pressure doesn’t come from the
schools, but from the parents. In Japan,
we have no natural resources, so produ-
cing skilled labour is our only source of
w e a l t h . For parents eager to see their
offspring succeed,education is an invest-
m e n t . F u r t h e r m o r e, a strong sense of
hierarchy is established in the school
from early on,with children divided into
the talented and the not so talented.
INTERVIEW BY
PHILIPPE DEMENET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
K a ra t e - t rained teachers
lose a ro u n d
Unprecedented violence among young people is sweeping Japan. Some see it as
a reaction to an earlier crackdown, but Yodji Morita, a sociologist from Osaka
City University, criticizes the reliance on force
VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS: A WO R L DWIDE A F FA I R
In Tokyo, an exam crash course is relayed to the headmaster’s office. In Kyoto, young boys who cracked study in a juvenile detention centre.

But unlike in many industrialized coun-
tries, family and community ties are still
very strong. Do they help to reduce the
violence?
Compared with other rich countries,
our crime rate is very low, as is school
violence. That’s why the 1998 outbreak
was such a shock. It was seen as a sign of
impending social change. In the past,
you had to be self-effacing and melt into
the group. Modern Japan is becoming
more individualistic.
What can people running the schools do?
Respect the children by giving them
a sense of responsibility. Encourage them
to help each other in new ways. This is
what current educational reforms are
aiming at. ■
