
DONALD MACLEOD
JOURNALIST FOR THE GUARDIAN NEWSPAPER


When your univers i t y
closes down…
Since the 1930s, an organization in the UK has assisted refugee scholars
in pursuing their academic careers. Abdul Lalzad, a professor from Kabul,
is among those who have managed to continue their research
2 . POWER T R A P S
T
hermal engineering is not usually seen as
politically dangerous and in normal cir-
c u m s t a n c e s, a scientist working on solar
powered desalination would be welcome
in an arid land like A f g h a n i s t a n . But cir-
cumstances have not been normal in that unhappy
country for a long time.
At Kabul University,Professor Abdul Lalzad and
his colleagues struggled with shortages due to the
long civil war and declining numbers of staff and stu-
dents (a majority of them women in the early 1990s),
but they were able to pursue research and teaching.
The holder of a Russian masters degree, Lalzad held
senior positions at the university and had five text-
books and more than 30 published articles to his
credit.Kabul University was badly damaged during
the factional fighting between mujahedin groups
after the fall of the Russian-backed Najibullah govern-
ment, but it was not until the victory of the Taliban
that it was closed completely in 1996.
Uphill struggle
Lalzad’s academic work came to an abrupt halt
and his wife, P a s h t o o n , lost her job as a teacher when
women were forbidden to work. For his children,
especially his four daughters, educational prospects
were bleak.He worked for the Red Cross, in charge
of distributing food to 40,000 widows and disabled
p e o p l e. But he was arrested,beaten with Kalashnikovs
and thrown in prison on suspicion of giving infor-
mation to anti-Taliban forces. Contacts in the Red
Cross got him released, but knowing his life was in
danger he fled to Pakistan, where his wife and children
followed later.
He arrived in Britain in December 1998, where
resuming his academic research proved an uphill
struggle. After a frustrating 18-month wait while his
application for asylum was approved, he eventually
secured a place at South Bank University in London
to pursue his research.He was helped financially by the
Council for Assisting Refugee A c a d e m i c s, a body
founded in 1933 to assist Jewish academics and other
victims of the Nazi purges of universities. CARA also
helped to secure visas for his
f a m i l y, whose last members
arrived a week before the Ame-
rican bombing of A f g h a n i s t a n
s t a r t e d . Speaking at the launch of
the the Network for Education
and Academic Rights last June in
Paris (see p. 3 0 ) , Lalzad warned
that Afghanistan had become a
“roundabout of anti-civilization….
Vying to be the world’s biggest
supplier of opium, a safe-haven
for terrorists and religious extre-
m i s t s, a place with massive des-
truction of human rights, particu-
larly women’s rights,A f g h a n i s t a n
poses threats to regional and inter-
national peace and stability.”
Against this sombre back-
drop, his research into desalination techniques has
been progressing at South Bank, where he is building
an experimental model of a small solar- p o w e r e d
plant. In September, he presented his results to an
international conference and has been approached by
companies to patent his ideas.“If I get the results that
I obtained from mathematical modelling, it will be the
most cost effective and most efficient desalination
technology in the world,” he said.
CARA points out that the payback Britain has
enjoyed from helping refugee academics is out of all
proportion to the tiny investment: since the 1930s,
refugee scholars have included 18 Nobel prizewinners.
While the locations of persecution have changed, t h e
problem remains. CA R A is now helping more than 30
refugee academics, including an Iraqi paediatrician
who helped the Kurdish population,a parasitologist
from Somalia and an Ethiopian pathologist who
arrived in London with five bullets still in his body.
But the thirst for education is powerful.On her
second day in Britain, L a l z a d ’s daughter Shogofa
was enrolling in college: she intends to become a
doctor. ■

Professor Lalzad, reunited with his family in London.
