MARCUS COLCHESTER
DIRECTOR OF THE UK-BASED FOREST PEOPLES PROGRAMMEANDWINNEROFTHE BRITISH ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL
INSTITUTE’S LUCY MAIR MEDALFOR APPLIED ANTHROPOLOGY



This park is no longer
your land
For over a century, millions of indigenous people around the world were driven off their land in the
name of nature conservation. While local communities are regaining the right to manage these
protected areas, their struggle often runs up against deep prejudice 
reating protected areas to conserve nature
is a recent invention,born in the tumultuous
rush of land grabbing during the A m e r i c a n
conquest of the west. This was the time
when pioneers, the U. S. c a v a l r y,gold miners
and Indians struggled to impose their
different visions of life and land use on the
continent.
When the first national parks were
created (see box), one single vision had
excluded the others. The 1964 U. S.
Wilderness Act formalized this ideal notion
of nature as wilderness, untouched by
humans. It stated that national parks were
to preserve areas “where man himself is a
visitor who doesn’t remain.” The reality,
h o w e v e r, was different:most of these areas
were inhabited,used,managed and owned
by indigenous peoples. I n d e e d , nearly all
the most important protected areas in the
United States are owned or claimed by
Indians.
Many indigenous peoples remain
perplexed by western views of what
conservation means. “My Dad used to say
‘that’s our pantry.’ We knew about all the
plants and animals, when to pick,when to
h u n t ,” remarked Ruby Dunstan of the
Nl’aka’pamux people,who have been trying
to prevent the logging of their ancestral
lands around Stein Valley in the Canadian
province of A l b e r t a .“But some of the white
environmentalists seemed to think if
something was declared a wilderness, no-
one was allowed inside because it was so
fragile. So they have put a fence around it,
or maybe around themselves.”
An export model
Over a century, the U. S.model of nature
conservation has been exported worldwide.
In Africa,the practice of mass exclusion of
indigenous peoples to make way for
protected areas intensified in the 1960s and
has continued to this day. The Central
Kalahari Game Reserve was originally set
up for the benefit of the resident hunting
and gathering San, but they are currently
being expelled from the area by the
government of Botswana.
Some one million square kilometres of
f o r e s t s, pasturelands and farmlands have
been expropriated in Africa to make way for
conservation over the course of a century.
No one has been able to document how
many indigenous people were displaced as
a consequence, but they must number in
the millions.
Early 
warning
One widow belonging to the Twa people
recalls how she was expelled from the
C o n g o ’s Kahuzi-Biega National Park in the
1 9 6 0 s.“It was early in the morning. I looked
through the door and saw people in
uniforms with guns. Then one of them
forced the door of our house and started
shouting that we had to leave immediately
because the park is not our land.I first did
not understand what he was talking about
because all my ancestors have lived on these
lands.They were so violent that I left with
my children.”
Denied their traditional lands and
livelihoods, these Twa—traditional hunting
and gathering “pygmies”—now eke out an
existence in a number of squatter camps on
the fringes of their once-extensive forest
territory.They suffer extreme malnutrition,
landlessness, demoralization and despair.
We likewise lack accurate statistics about
A s i a . In 1993, an estimate by the Society
for Participatory Research in Asia suggests
that in India alone, as many as 600,000 tribal
people have been forced off their land due
to the setting up of protected areas.
Concerns about the social impact of
protected areas were voiced from their
i n c e p t i o n . By the 1970s, UNESCO had
developed the idea of “biosphere reserves,”
in which strictly protected “core zones”—
the old type of protected area—were to be
encircled with “buffer zones,” w h e r e
provisions were made for the local
inhabitants to continue their traditional
lifestyles and engage in controlled
community development projects.
Conservation agencies implementing
projects along these lines could get them
listed by UNESCO to gain international
recognition of their efforts. H o w e v e r, w h i l e
enlightened for their time, the management

Standing up for their rights: in Brazil,

of these experimental reserves has not been
markedly successful from the local peoples’
point of view.They continue the tradition of
imposing outsiders’ views of nature on local
peoples’ lands.
A review of buffer zone projects,c a r r i e d
out by the World Conservation Union in
1991 concluded that they had been,for the
main part,“disappointing…Local people,
often with good reason, frequently see parks
as government-imposed restrictions on their
legitimate rights. Patrolling by guards,
demarcation of boundaries and provision of
tourist facilities will therefore not deter
them from agricultural encroachment.”
The report also noted that the best
buffer zone projects had “not been short-
term aid projects but initiatives taken by
local community groups or resource
managers who […] made creative attempts
t o solve the day-to-day problems which
they faced.”
A well-documented example of these
d i f ficulties is the Amboseli National Park in
Ke n y a . Established on Maasai lands, i t
initially denied them access to dry season
pastures and watering points. The Maasai
showed their resentment for the loss of
their livelihoods by spearing rhinos, lions
and other wildlife. To compensate the
Maasai, a “buffer zone” was built up, with
World Bank support.New watering points
were established outside the “core zone”
and compensation fees were planned.
Promising at fir s t , the project broke down—
compensation went unpaid and the water
supply system deteriorated.
In the Philippines in the early 1970s,
World Bank plans to fund the construction
of dams on the Chico River, which would
have displaced some 80,000 Kalinga and
Bontoc people from their ancestral lands in
central Luzon, led to co-ordinated resistance
and the emergence of strong local
associations promoting land rights and
a u t o n o m y.Similar struggles in the A m e r i c a s,
Asia and Africa have resulted in the
emergence of vigorous national and
international coalitions of indigenous
p e o p l e,which have pushed their demands at
the United Nations and other international
bodies.
The movement has been dramatically
successful in obliging a re-evaluation of

Ta m i n g
the Wild We s t
On June 30, 1864, President Abraham
Lincoln signed the Yosemite Land
Grant bill, giving 39,200 acres of federal
land encompassing Yosemite Valley to the
state of California for public enjoyment and
p r e s e r va t i o n . The creation of the fir s t
national park took place during the
disruptions of the American Civil War at a
time when a devastating series of “Indian
Wars” was being waged to subdue Indian
autonomy. Thus the startling landscapes of
Yo s e m i t e, substantially an outcome of
Indian systems of land use, were proposed
for conservation by the very same settlers
who, twelve years previously, had waged
the “Mariposa Indian Wa r ” against the
area’s indigenous people—the Miwok. The
main proponent of the park, L a Fa y e t t e
B u r n e l l , who led the Mariposa Battalion and
professed a “take-no-prisoners” approach
to the Miwok, wanted to “sweep the
territory of any scattered bands that might
infest it.”
Once the Park was established, it was run by
the U.S. Army for the next 52 years before
being taken over by the National Pa r k s
Service.
The Miwok petitioned the U.S. government
in 1890. They called for compensation for
their losses and denounced the managers of
the park. “The valley is cut up completely
with dusty, sandy roads leading from the
hotels of the white in every direction… All
seem to come only to hunt money… The
valley has been taken away from us [for] a
pleasure ground….” Their pleas were
ignored and further evictions of remnant
Miwok settlements were made in 1906,
1929 and as late as 1969.
What the Miwok had noted was that the
national parks, set up to preserve
“wilderness” regions “unimpaired for the
enjoyment of future generations” were also
designed with a profit motive. Indeed, the
first parks of Yosemite and Ye l l o w s t o n e,
were created largely as a result of pressure
from the railway-building lobby, w h i c h
sought to increase the numbers of fare-
paying passengers by routing their tracks
near  scenic sites for what today we have
reinvented as “eco-tourism.” ■
zil, Indians from various indigenous groups stage a protest over territorial boundaries.

international human rights principles.As a
r e s u l t , existing conventions have been
reviewed and new ones developed which
recognize that indigenous peoples have the
right to own, control and manage their
traditional territories and to represent
themselves through their own institutions.
Recently the UN established a Permanent
Forum to address their concerns.
The same movement has also
demanded that conservationists change
their thinking and practice. For example,
in 1998, tribal people in southern India
forced out of the Indira Gandhi National
Park as part of an “ e c o - d e v e l o p m e n t ”
scheme funded by the Global Environment
Fa c i l i t y, successfully addressed their
concerns to the World Bank Inspection
P a n e l .Communities impacted by the Bank’s
projects can appeal to this independent
body if they believe the Bank is not
adhering to its principles.Their complaints
were upheld.
Rethinking old ways
By the 1990s, it became clear that very
many of the protected areas imposed
against the will of local residents were failing
to achieve their conservation objectives.
The denial of indigenous rights only meant
that protected areas seeded their own
failure by surrounding themselves by
h o s t i l i t y.The Manas Tiger Reserve in A s s a m
(India), for example, enclosed part of the
traditional homeland of the Bodo. L o c a l
resentment led to three quarters of the
rhinoceroses being killed.
To align with the changes in
international law, the World Conservation
Union revised its systems of categories of
protected areas to accept that indigenous
peoples may own and manage protected
areas, not just state agencies as previously
required. In the 1990s, the World Wildlife
Fund for Nature (WWF), the Wo r l d
Conservation Congress and the Wo r l d
Commission on Protected Areas all adopted
new policies and resolutions which strongly
endorse indigenous peoples’ rights and
promote the co-management of protected
areas, based on negotiated agreements.
Putting these principles into practice,
however, is easier said than done. In many
c o u n t r i e s, laws on protected areas
automatically extinguish residents’ rights
of natural resource use, free movement and
a c c e s s. Implanting the “new model” o f
conservation implies undertaking major
national reforms.
I n d e e d , because of deeply held
p r e j u d i c e s, governments in many countries
continue to deny indigenous peoples’ rights
and seek to assimilate them into the
national majority through forced
r e l o c a t i o n ,re-education and by breaking up
their communal lands, as in Malaysia and
I n d o n e s i a . National policies towards
indigenous peoples thus also need
reforming if conservation is to wear a
human face. Recent changes in the
Venezuelan constitution recognize
indigenous peoples’ rights to their
“habitats”and a law has just been passed
encouraging Indians to map and demarcate
their own lands to regularize their rights in
these areas.
Community-based conservation also
implies real challenges for indigenous
peoples themselves. Regaining control of
their territories may mean reactivating long-
submerged systems of self-government.
Changes in indigenous economies will also
need to be addressed—many indigenous
peoples have adopted new ways of farming
their lands, harvesting timbers and other
natural resources. Many now hunt with new
weapons and use industrial technologies to
process and transport crops. C u s t o m a r y
systems of regulating access to these
resources now need rethinking if they are to
be effective. In the Brazilian Amazon,the
WWF is now working with the Xavante
I n d i a n s, to help them devise new strategies
for managing their reserves. The aim is to
strengthen traditional ways of managing
resources with new knowledge about
environmental limits.
As the International Alliance of
Indigenous-Tribal Peoples of the Tropical
Forests noted in 1996:“Indigenous peoples
recognize that it is in their long-term interest
to use their resources sustainably and
respect the need for environmental
c o n s e r v a t i o n . They recognize that the
expertise of conservation organizations can
be of use to their self-development and
seek a mutually beneficial relationship
based on trust, t r a n s p a r e n cy and
accountability.” ■

A new mission for protected areas? Tourists glide along Botswana’s Okavango
