“A
bout five years ago,my mother started
acting bizarre: telling secrets and lies.
She was only 59 but she began falling
down a lot and her eyebrow would
twitch uncontrollably.The day after I
found out she had Huntington’s I went to the library
because I knew nothing about the disease. I
remember standing there,my two young boys playing
at my feet, as I went through the medical jargon to
find out three things: fir s t , there is no cure—my
mother is going to die; s e c o n d , her children—my
b r o t h e r, two sisters and myself—have a 50 percent
chance of inheriting the gene causing the disease; a n d
t h i r d , our kids are at risk.”
“I knew that I had to keep this secret—from eve-
ryone but my family. I went on the Internet where
I found a kind of underground Huntington’s com-
munity—they told me about the genetic test for
the disease but warned me to be careful.After hea-
ring the stories about people losing their jobs and
medical insurance, I decided not to test.”
Julie Sando is not alone in the U. S.Many people
are protecting their genetic secrets by foregoing
intimate knowledge about themselves and their
f a m i l i e s. Indeed fear of genetic discrimination is
cited as the major reason why about one-third of
people approached by the National Human
Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) refuse to
participate in testing, according to Barbara Fuller,
senior policy advisor.After geneticists first identi-
fied the gene linked to Huntington’s in 1993,they
predicted that they would eliminate the disease in
a generation. Yet only 15 to 25 percent of eligible
people in the U. S.have undergone testing.To grasp
the emotional stakes embedded in these genetic
secrets, Julie Sando recounts her experience.
A hazy view of genetics as
a window on the soul
“I waited four and a half years to have a test.N o t
one day went by that I didn’t think I saw a symptom
of the disease—I’d see my hand twitch or just
stumble over my words.Every time, I asked ‘is that
it?’ I couldn’t stand the mental anguish of not kno-
wing if my kids had the disease. It was time to face
it… There are two ways of testing:either go through
your insurance and put it on record or stay anony-
mous and pay out of pocket (about $1,000). We
didn’t have the cash so I took the ultimate risk.”
To protect patients like Julie, about 75 percent
of the states have passed laws,mostly in the last fiv e
y e a r s, to protect the confidentiality of genetic infor-
m a t i o n .A new set of federal regulations to reinforce
medical privacy in general is supposed to apply in
2003,but the new administration may re-open the
debate.
Yet some studies suggest that fear of genetic
discrimination overshadows the actual number of
cases documented.A major survey of health insu-
rance regulators, company representatives, agents
and genetic counsellors from seven states was publi-
shed at the end of 1999 to compare the impact of
genetic privacy legislation.According to one of the
a u t h o r s, Mark Hall, a professor at Wake Fo r e s t
University School of Medicine, “we didn’t find a
single well-documented case of discrimination.”
On the contrary, he reported that a person with a
serious but asymptomatic genetic condition faces
little or no difficulty in obtaining health insurance.
The reason,Hall says, is that insurance companies
assume people will change jobs and therefore poli-
cies every two to five years. So by the time a client
actually requires treatment, it is likely that he or she
will have moved on to another insurer.
But as critics point out, though this may be
t h e case for a 35-year-old woman genetically
AMY OTCHET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Forsaking g e n e t i c s e c re t s
For fear of losing their jobs and health insurance, many Americans are chosing
not to learn of their own “secrets” by foregoing genetic testing

Julie Sando’s lifeline, her family.

predisposed to breast cancer, what about a woman
at the age of 50? As genetic tests become more
accurate and accessible in the next few years, “ I
cannot think of a reason why underwriters would
not use them,” says Fuller of the NHGRI. Hence
Julie Sando’s expression,“I took the ultimate risk.
”By notifying her insurer, she may have put her chil-
dren at risk of being denied coverage in the future
(see box).
“At the first appointment,” recalls Ju l i e, “ t h e
geneticist asked all kinds of questions: ‘who will
you tell about the test and why?’ But the real kicker
was, ‘Do you have nursing home insurance?’ I was
35 and asked if that wasn’t far- f e t c h e d . The res-
ponse was a dead,‘No.’
“At the next appoint-
m e n t , they took my blood.
The two months’ wait for
the result were the hardest
in my life. On January 22,
1 9 9 9 , I got up early with
my husband and we
p r a y e d .The wait at the hos-
pital seemed like forever.
The doctor wasn’t smiling
when he led us into a room
and there were tissue
boxes everywhere. Finally
he said,‘ You don’t have the
gene and neither do your children.But that doesn’t
change anything for your siblings.’ I felt like a
zombie. It took a year to get over survivor’s guilt.
“I’m the only one in the family who has gone for
a test. I recently asked my sister what keeps her from
g o i n g. She said, ‘ I ’ve a friend who tested negati-
vely for the disease but her company found it in her
files and they let her go. I have a sick husband. H o w
would we live if I lost my job and our insurance
benefits?’”
While recognizing the threat of discrimination,
some experts like Dorothy Wertz of the Shriver
Center (a research organization) wonder whether
public fear may be tinged by confusion over gene-
tics and the notion that “we are the sum of our
genes,” which pervades popular culture. For many
people, test results are seen as windows onto our
s o u l s, says We r t z .Not only are we powerless to alter
this information, but it may be used against us.
Hence the gut instinct to preserve “genetic pri-
vacy”at all costs.
Yet this notion of “genetic privacy ” d o e s n ’t
make sense biologically. For example, many of
the state laws offer special protection for genetic
testing of a disease like Huntington’s.Yet an ordi-
nary cholesterol test can reveal a great deal about
family history like predisposition to heart disease.
“ The state laws are
good faith efforts but may
offer a false sense of secu-
rity,” says Thomas Murray,
president of the Hastings
Center for Bioethics.“It is
dishonest to assign gene-
tics special moral status,”
h e s a y s, because most
common and serious condi-
tions are a complicated mix
of genetic and non-genetic
factors.
Julie agrees that the
solution lies in protecting
medical, not just genetic, privacy. Yet this does not
rule out the need for laws to prevent genetic discri-
mination,according to patient rights advocates like
Joanne Hustead, director of the non-profit National
Partnership of Women and Fa m i l i e s.“ This is the new
frontier of civil rights—which is about protecting
people from discrimination on the basis of immutable
and very personal characteristics, like race and reli-
g i o n . There is also a bit of self-interest involved,”
she says. “Everyone has genetic mutations and the
moment that you start making decisions on the basis
of one mutation or another, there is no end to it.We
are all at risk.” ■
