A t o r n a d o on wheels
Neither poverty nor polio can slow down Carmen Reyes Zubiaga, who has
thrown herself into the cause of the disabled from the Philippines to Cambodia
CARLO M. TADIAR
MANILA-BASED JOURNALIST
2 . NEW BONDS
P
aralyzed by polio at the age of a year- a n d - a -
half in exceedingly poor circumstances,
Carmen Reyes Zubiaga has spent a lifetime
battling the odds.To d a y, she is the chief of sev-
eral organizations and the leading light in her
country for the movement seeking to uplift the plight
of those who, like her, have been shorn of a normal
physical life.
Born the sixth of nine children of a carpenter and
laundry woman,Carmen has lived most of her life in
Ta y t a y, R i z a l , a municipality at the edge of the
sprawling national capital of the Philippines, Metro
M a n i l a . Navigating the winding, narrow streets of
Taytay requires great dexterity while dodging a torrent
of traffic and people. But Carmen is a
master of this labyrinth.On the day of
our meeting, she beat me to the place
of assignation by an embarrassing 20
minutes, despite my two fully opera-
tional legs and four automobile
wheels. Carmen arrived via tricycle,
the motorized pedicab that is a pop-
ular mode of public transport.
Campus activist
I miss her the first time I survey
the restaurant, because I fail to see
the wheelchair and the woman who
turns out to be Carmen Reyes
Zubiaga seems far too young for
someone so accomplished. She has
set up three organizations and a foun-
dation—all dedicated to supporting
the disabled through micro-credit pro-
g r a m m e s, s c h o l a r s h i p s, and other forms of assistance.
Not only did she create these groups, but she also
devotes virtually all of her time to them without fin a n-
cial compensation.
This remarkably pretty and gentle person con-
trasts with the steely and authoritarian persona she
exudes by voice over the telephone. A strong vocal
command is clearly essential to impose her will in a
society that customarily downplays individual volition.
“My mother said I was very hard-headed as a child,”
she laughs. “I didn’t even know what a wheelchair
looked like,” she says, recalling her childhood and
early adolescence spent crawling on the floor because
her family couldn’t afford a wheelchair.At the age of
14, she took the initiative to write to a ladies’ club
asking for support,which they readily supplied.Wh i l e
her parents were unable to offer much materially,
they were generous in their support. “ They never
treated me as a special person,” she says, which meant,
“in my family, I never experienced any discrimination.”
Poverty also forced her to stop temporarily her
education after elementary school. But ten years later,
Carmen resumed her studies through the assistance of
a Belgian missionary, Sister Valeriana Baerts, and the
institute she founded, Tahanang Walang Hagdanan
(House Without Stairs), which is now the country’s
foremost agency advancing the plight of the disabled.
Though many scoffed at her for daring to enter col-
lege, Carmen rose to the top of her class while con-
tributing to comic books to help pay for her studies.
Struck by the number of wheelchair-bound students
(around 10),she launched her first volunteer project
to raise funds to construct ramps for wheelchair access
around campus.
Tahanang proved to be Carmen’s well-spring—not
only did she work as a volunteer throughout her stu-
dent days, but after graduating, she took up the roles
of public relations executive and project developer for
nine years. This experience enabled her to hone her
skills in organizing, marketing, fund-raising and net-
w o r k i n g. It was also at Tahanang that she met her
husband,who is not disabled.
After Tahanang, she offered her services to the
United Nations Development Program,which sent her
to Cambodia to launch the first government
Carmen Reyes Zubiaga: promoting economic independence.

endeavour—a semi-autonomous agency—to deal
with its teeming numbers of disabled,a legacy of the
bitter civil war.
Even though conditions are worse there than they
are in the Philippines, she says, the centre managed to
set up employment opportunities for the disabled.
But her greatest fulfilment lay in setting an example
for Cambodians with disability, w h o, she says, f o r-
merly had a single destiny—begging.
Business from home
“When I would go to the market in Cambodia,
I’d be regarded differently,” she says,“because I was
b u y i n g, not begging. So for Cambodian people, I
painted a different picture of the disabled.”
The disabled in Cambodia had previously been
reduced to the most abject status, robbed of any hope
of happiness, l o v e, m a r r i a g e, and children. S h e, on the
other hand,had crossed an ocean to go to Cambodia
and  had brought along her husband and two children.
When she returned to the Philippines after three
y e a r s, a third child was added to her brood, a girl
entrusted to her parentage by a very poor Cambodian
couple.
Back home in the Philippines, she set up three
organizations and a foundation to help people with
handicaps pursue an education,learn new skills and
start their own businesses. The organizations clearly
reject the charity of the missionaries. I n s t e a d , t h e y
promote self-assurance and economic independence.
“You have to create wealth before it can be distrib-
uted,” says Carmen.So for example, to fund educa-
tional scholarships, her foundation is running a coop-
erative grocery aimed at becoming a chain.
Employment is very difficult to come by for the
disabled.Not only are they the last to be considered
for any position,but commuting between work and
home is also extremely arduous. “That’s why we’re
promoting micro-entrepreneurship and giving out
l o a n s, so the disabled can set up their own businesses
in their own homes,” she says.
The organizations also stress a principle close to
C a r m e n ’s heart: the virtue of volunteer work.“I am the
beneficiary of other people’s goodwill,” she under -
scores.“If not for a volunteer who brought me to the
National Orthopaedic Hospital, I would not have met
Sister Valeriana Baerts….No matter who you are, if
you don’t know how to share, you’ll get nowhere.” ■
Susheelamma,
the founder.
