RENÉ LEFORT
DIRECTOR OFTHE UNESCO COURIER



Barbed wire
in the research fie l d
As patent claims surge and intellectual property rights are tightened,
researchers are struggling to safeguard the free movement
of information, a key condition for pursuing their work
1 . THE MONEY GAME
W
e ’re said to be living in the know-
ledge society, but does this mean
that knowledge is easier to come by
and moving about more freely?
Has access to knowledge—a basic
academic freedom—improved? Technological strides
undoubtedly make for easier access to information.
But the movement of knowledge is more than a
matter of technology; it is also governed by intellec-
tual property rights, which impose their own limits.
What is the “right balance” between private owner-
ship of knowledge and distributing it to the public free
of charge?
Many scientists, feeling their freedom is under
t h r e a t , have taken action.MIT (Massachusetts Ins-
titute of Te c h n o l o g y ) , one of the leading univer-
sity research centres in the United States, recently
announced that it is putting all its courses and tea-
ching resources on the web free of charge. F u r-
t h e r m o r e,over 22,000 scientists from 161 countries
have launched a boycott of science publication edi-
tors and started campaigning for a “public science
library.”
Legal 
hurdles
“We really don’t see why we should hand our
royalties over to a publisher whose goal is first and
foremost a lucrative one, when we have done all the
w o r k ,” says boycott participant Michael A s h b u r n e r,
a biology professor at Cambridge University in the
U K . “ These publishing houses set such exhorbi-
tant subscription prices that even in rich countries,
it’s sometimes impossible to gain access to some
i n f o r m a t i o n . You can imagine where that leaves
scientists in developing countries.”
In the past few years, technological progress
has prompted the U. S. Congress and the European
Commission to strengthen intellectual property
r i g h t s. These reforms gained a global character
under the aegis of the World Intellectual Property
Rights Organization (WIPO) and the World Tr a d e
Organization (WTO),through the TRIPS accords
( Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
R i g h t s ) . Since 1995,any state engaging in trade has
had to comply with this new legal order that covers
such sensitive matters as the length of time a text can
be protected by copyright and possible legal

exceptions to this (known as “fair use”). By and
large, exceptions cover private copy (for personal,
non-commercial use only) and quotation rights for
scientific, educational and academic purposes.
Under cover of international standardization,
the length of time literary or artistic intellectual
property can be protected has just been increased
from 50 to 70 years after the author’s death. C o n c r e-
t e l y, this means that less scientific information is
freely accessible in the public domain.
F u r t h e r m o r e, computer product manufacturers
have developed “technical measures” to fight
“ p i r a cy ” and prevent copying (of software, d a t a-
bases and so on),which keeps users from enjoying
their full rights under the principle of fair use.
Wo r s e, trying to steer around these “technical mea-
sures”could spell legal trouble. Soon,anyone who
tries to exercise legitimate copyrights could be pro-
secuted!
More generally, the scope of information and
knowledge that qualifies for protection is on the rise.
Biotechnology, the human genome and even stem
cells are starting to enter this domain, c r e a t i n g
t i g h t restrictions on genetic
r e s e a r c h . The same goes for
“teaching methods”and data-
b a s e s. For a while now, t h e r e
have even been attempts to
protect ideas and algorithms.
So far, they have been unsuc-
c e s s f u l . Major companies such
as British Telecom have fil e d
for patents on hypertext links,
others have done the same in
the multimedia field.The more patents1 there are,
the more research becomes fragmented and com-
partmentalized.The end result is that researchers’
freedom is restricted.
The risk is that intellectual property rights
become so tight that activities relating to free aca-
demic exchange are legally endangered. Fo r
e x a m p l e, a Princeton University professor has
stopped teaching a course on certain software enco-
ding techniques out of fear that communication
companies will take him to court.And an MIT stu-
dent asked one of his professors to sign a confi-
dentiality agreement before reading his thesis!
Looking at these trends, one can only begin to
question the purpose of intellectual property rights.
The main one is to guarantee the universal spread
of knowledge and inventions, in exchange for pro-
tection from the community for a limited time.Th e
desire to balance out the community’s and inven-
tors’ interests is embodied in the protection time
limits and the principle of fair use.
The debate is raging between those who advo-
cate longer time limits for protecting works and
s c i e n t i fic information, and those who argue that
society needs freer, more universal and less expen-
sive access to knowledge.This debate symbolizes the
quest to achieve social acceptability for what has
become commonly known as “the knowledge
society.”
In an economy of globalized knowledge, t h e
issue is crucial for developing countries, which hold
just three percent of the world’s patents.The 1999
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
report stated that “tightened intellectual property
rights keep developing countries out of the know-
ledge sector,” adding that the “relentless march of
intellectual property rights needs to be stopped
and questioned.”
As researchers from the industrialized coun-
tries see the results of their work come under tighter
p r o t e c t i o n , their counterparts in the South have
less and less access to the scientific information
required for developing products geared towards
local needs.For example,dependence of poor coun-
tries on imported medicine, which is expensive and
inaccessible for most of their populations, c o n t i-
nues to grow.
On the other hand, Western researchers have
free access to the scientific information passed down
from one generation to the next
in developing countries. Since
patent laws do not recognize
traditional and indigenous
forms of knowledge, s o m e
scientists have leapt at the
chance to patent them to their
b e n e f i t . In 1995, the UNDP
reports that two researchers
from the University of Missis-
sippi Medical Center were
granted the U.S. patent for using turmeric to heal
wounds, an art that has been practiced in India for
thousands of years.To get the patent repealed,the
claim had to be backed by written evidence—an
ancient Sanskrit text! 
To fund research in the world’s public interest,
some organizations, such as the Consultative Group
for International Agricultural Research, s u g g e s t
taxing patents registered with the W I P O. In 1998,a
tax of $100 per patent would have brought in $350
m i l l i o n , a sum well above MIT’s annual budget
($226 million). More generally, the legal frame-
work of intellectual property should spur access to
all forms of knowledge,because that is clearly in the
general interest.The issue will be on the agenda of
the World Information Society Summit,slated for
2003. ■
+ …
www.unesco.org/webworld/observatory
www.publiclibraryofscience.org
UNDP Human Development Report,1999.
“Tightened intellectual
property rights
keep developing
countries out of
the knowledge sector.”
1. The WIPO says that bet-
ween 1980 and 2000 the
number of patents granted
in the world doubled and
requests for patents in-
creased ninefold.
