W
e ’ll just call him Z.L. H e ’s about 30
and has a body-piercing shop in
southern Fr a n c e. His head is shaved
and his chest is bare. A tangle of
p i p e s, body organs and pieces of
metal is tattooed on his right arm. His smile reveals a
charming row of chrome cobalt teeth.The man dreams
of building his very own steel skeleton and has already
started his transformation by implanting five Te flo n
ball-bearings between his chest muscles.
Z.L.is a former punk,who went through a self-
destructive phase of drug abuse but turned “ w i s e ”b y
focusing on his “technological body.” Now he calls
himself a cy b e r p u n k .“A few years ago, I almost died.
I needed a reason to live and that led me to create a
new personality.As I rebuilt myself, I became a very
positive person,” he says.
Hosting parasites
The cyberpunk movement has followers around
the world. In Australia, an artist called Stelarc has
implanted himself with a third ear made of Te flo n ,t h e
only metal the human body does not reject. In the
United States, the method of sub-cutaneous
implanting used by Steve Hayworth and Jon Cobb,
extends beyond the world of art. Two hundred
Americans have permanently changed their bodies at
around $900 an implant.In France, such operations
are strictly illegal except for medical reasons.
“ When I used to get high in a stairwell, I was
committing the crime of bodily harm. I was violating
the law protecting the integrity of my body. But the
law doesn’t distinguish between the harm of getting
high and positive reconstruction. So officially
speaking, we get our implants abroad.”
Z . L . swears by the apocalyptic writings of
cyberpunk authors such as Bruce Sterling of the U. S.
and Australian William Gibson, who regard human
bodies as foreign objects. For these sci-fi g u r u s, b o d i e s
are just hosts for parasites of various kinds—physical
for now, but before long, technological or even virtual.
Be it a laptop computer, mobile phones,
smartcards or an electronic tag for a criminal—
technology is increasingly becoming an extension of
the human body. Z . L . is an assiduous reader of
specialist publications like those of the Massachusetts
Institute of Te c h n o l o g y. It is only a matter of time, h e
s a y s, before technology is integrated within the body.
Anticipating the revolution, he has already taught
himself how to do surgical implants and other
operations.
“ The state uses technology to strengthen its control
over us,” he says.“By opposing this control,I remain
a punk.When the first electronic tags are implanted in
the bodies of criminals,maybe in the next five years, I ’l l
know how to remove them,deactivate them and spread
viruses to roll over Big Brother.” His work as Fr a n c e ’s
first body artist to experiment with implants is
confidential. He won’t just operate on anyone. He
carefully evaluates the philosophical, artistic or
political motives of those who seek his services. For
Z . L . , technology stands for liberation, n o t
enslavement.
He follows in the steps of Kevin Wa r w i c k , a British
professor who pioneered research into implants and
nanotechnology and is determined to cross the line
and change himself irrevocably into a “cyborg.”
“Right now I’m working on how to implant a
chip in my arm to operate, for example, my computer
by remote control,” he says. “I want to make
technology part of my body so I’m not controlled by
machines any more. It might seem a bit crazy, but at
the rate computer technology,virtual memory and the
power of computer chips are increasing, we’ll all be
asking in 10 years’ time for implants to increase our
knowledge, our intelligence and our memories. I’m
just a step ahead of you.” ■
MARC MILLANVOYE
FRENCH JOURNALIST



Te flon under my skin
Meet an aspiring cyborg who’s already started experimenting on his own
body, in the wake of the cyberpunk movement. He claims it’s allowed him
to turn the page on drugs and literally, rebuild himself
4 . C Y B E R S P E C I E S
“Handswriting,” by the Australian performance artist Stelarc (1982).
