fishing or fishing with aids like dyna-
mite that damage the ecosystem. It des-
troys basic habitats that are key to the
life-cycle of fish and shellfish. The bio-
diversity of a coral reef is like that of a
tropical forest,so it’s vital to put a stop
to such damage.
What do integrated coastal management
projects involve?
They start from the firm belief that
it’s much wiser to avoid damaging the
environment than trying to restore
w h a t ’s already been lost, though the
T
INTERVIEW BY LUCIA IGLESIAS KUNTZ
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



A coastal
balancing act
The rich biodiversity of coastal regions can be protected without chasing away tourism
and other activities. On one condition: that local people play the lead role in steering conservation
projects, says coastal expert Stephen B. Olsen*
he first time coastal protection appeare d
on the international agenda was at the
1992 Rio Earth Summit. What progress
has been made since then?
Quite a lot. We ’ve gone from tal-
king about general concepts to concrete
a c h i e v e m e n t s, such as the Integrated
Coastal Management (ICM) pro-
g r a m m e s.To be effective, these have to
involve conflicting groups such as the
private sector (industry and tourism),
f i s h e r m e n , villagers and NGOs and
make them realize that they have to
work together. In 2000, there were over
300 such programmes operating in 95
c o u n t r i e s, including many developing
n a t i o n s. We ’ve also had to face the
painful fact that not everything can be
s a v e d .We have to make choices because
unfortunately, in some places, popula-
tion pressure is so high that there’s
nothing left to preserve. If you visit the
main Mediterranean tourist areas in
Italy, Spain or Tunisia, you can see the
high price being paid for ill-conceived
development.
So tourism isn’t compatible with pro-
tecting coastal areas?
Not always.Th a t ’s certainly been the
case in large areas of the Mediterranean
and of the United States. But in many
other countries, such as Cuba and Costa
R i c a , you can see much more thoughtful
tourist development going on. A few
years ago, I worked as a consultant on  a
project in the Sabana and Camagüey
i s l a n d s,off the north coast of Cuba, w h e r e
the government had begun to build huge
hotels almost on the beach.You reached
them by p e d r i p l a n e s, roads which crossed
the lagoon and caused major ecolo-
g i c a l and water-flow problems. U n d e r
the project, sponsored by the Global
Environment Fa c i l i t y,1 the Cubans com-
pletely changed the design, location and
density of the islands’ infrastructure,
resulting in very elegant and environ-
mentally friendly tourist facilities. A t
great expense, the p e d r i p l a n e s w e r e
removed and replaced by structures that
allowed the water to flow freely. Today,
the area attracts tourists and the lagoons
are in better condition.
The second World Climate Confere n c e
will be held in South Africa in 2002.
Wh a t ’s the message to it as far as coastal
protection is concerned?
The big challenge is to help local
people change the way they live and
make authorities more responsive.Th e
problem isn’t a technical one,a question
of know-how or even money. You can
do plenty of good things without much
money, as long as you build local capa-
city and commitment and not just send
in outside experts like me.The problem
is that experts often want to create pros-
perity as quickly as possible without
thinking about the future.
But nearly half the global population
lives in coastal areas and 12 of the
world’s 15 biggest cities are by the sea.
What problems does this create for
coastal areas?
The problems are all to do with
human activity, though they aren’t the
same everywhere. The most common
one is the poor location of roads, docks
and infrastructure along coasts; the des-
truction of major habitats such as coral
r e e f s, marine and wetland food sources;
and pollution of water by sewage dum-
p i n g. The other big problem is over-
Is the grass growi

success of the project isn’t always
o b v i o u s. We can apply what we have
learned from working in some very
extensive areas, and  prevent errors and
bad practices from being repeated. I f
we want to move towards sustainable
development and conservation,we have
to improve present forms of gover-
nance. Responsibility for conservation
cannot fall on governments alone—all
interest groups have to be involved.
Then you have to work out what to
develop and what to preserve (see next
p a g e ) .And surprisingly, I ’ve found you
can nearly always reconcile different
interests. But you really have to get a
democratic process going because if
you just allow technicians to work in
isolation,the result is worth very little.
If a project is well thought-out, t h e
people affected by it will understand
and give it their backing, because they
will have been involved from the outset.
Can you give examples of sound coastal
management?
Well, there’s Chesapeake Bay, the
largest and most productive estuary in
the U. S. , the Wadden Sea (shared by
G e r m a n y, Denmark and the Nether-
lands) and the Thames Estuary in
E n g l a n d . Here in Rhode Island, t h e
Coastal Resources Center is trying to
revive an abandoned industrial port
filled with poor quality water.Another
example is the Venice Lagoon in Italy,
which is tremendously complicated but
has enjoyed moderate success.
It seems only rich countries can afford to
rehabilitate their coastal regions.
Not really. Developing countries
have many experimental schemes las-
ting four to six years, but so far few
long-term,large-scale projects, such as
the thriving almost 30-year coastal
management programme in Sri Lanka.
The key to its success has been not tack-
ling all problems at once, but singling
out two urgent ones—coastal erosion
and poorly located infrastructure.
The two main causes of erosion were
human—the mining of river sand
(which eventually builds beaches) and
the destruction of coral reefs to extract
l i m e. Sand was used to make cement
and the lime for plaster and to a lesser
extent farming, because it reduces soil
acidity and increases some crop yields.
Both types of mining created a lot of
jobs and were so profitable that it wasn’t
easy to regulate them in a very poor
country in a state of near civil war. But
there have been some notable achie-
vements. The two activities have been
almost entirely brought under control
and,more importantly, new infrastruc-
ture such as roads and hotels are built
away from beaches and cliffs.
The challenge to poor countries
today is to use this experience and learn
from the many experimental micro-
projects that exist (the Tanzanian island
of Mafia, the Honduran Gulf of Fon-
s e c a , the Philippines and other places),
along with bigger projects over wider
areas. ■
* Head of the Coastal Resources Center
at A m e r i c a ’s Rhode Island University.
1. The Global Environment Fa c i l i t y
(GEF) was set up in 1991 to protect
the environment and promote sustai-
nable development. Its members
include 166 gov e r n m e n t s, the main
development agencies, the scientific
community and a broad range of
NGOs and private sector bodies.
