M
arion Tr u e, the antiquities curator
of the prestigious J. Paul Getty
M u s e u m , was sitting in the
audience of a conference in Vi t e r b o
(Italy) when an Italian local heri-
tage official fired the claim: one of the museum’s
prize pieces, a fifth-century BC drinking cup, h a d
been looted from Cerveteri, in the ancient area of
L a t i u m. Decorated with scenes of the Trojan Wa r,
the cup,known as a ky l i x,bore the signatures of the
potter Euphronios and the painter Onesimos.
That was in 1997.Two years later, on Fe b r u a r y
5,1999, True chaperoned three antiquities, inclu-
ding the kylix, back to Italy. All three had been
stolen and found their way into the Getty’s 50,000-
strong antiquities collection in Malibu, C a l i f o r n i a .
One was purchased in 1982 from a European
dealer who told the Getty it had long been in
England.In fact,it had been published in 1958 as
part of a private collection in Italy. The last, a
youth head, came from the New York collectors
Lawrence and Barbara Fleischman,and had been
taken from an excavation storeroom in Venosa.
Since taking her post at the Getty in 1986,
True has had the unenviable job of dealing with
many controversial purchases made by her pre-
d e c e s s o r s,not to mention the museum’s reputation
of turning a blind eye on the problematic origins
of high-priced antiquities. In 1988,American dealer
Peg Goldberg confidently offered the Getty sixth-
century Byzantine mosaics stolen from the Panagía
Kanakariá church in Cyprus for $20 million.Tr u e
d e c l i n e d ,h o w e v e r,and reported the matter to the
head of Cyprus’ department of antiquities. Th e
mosaics were eventually returned. S t i l l , as recently
as 1994, Boston University’s Murray McClellan
chastized the museum for its “ flagrant disregard”
of the American Association of Museums’ code of
ethics.
One of the most embarrassing legacies of the
G e t t y ’s freewheeling past is the statue of a k o u r o s,
a naked youth, supposedly from the sixth century
B C. It was bought from a Swiss dealer in 1983 for
a reported $7 to $9 million. A letter accompa-
nying it, supposedly written by German scholar
Ernst Langlotz in 1952, placed the statue in a
Swiss collection.This letter is a forgery;it bears a
postal code that came into use only in the 1970s.
In 1990, an art historian compared the Getty’s
k o u r o s to a torso allegedly made in Rome in 1985
by an Italian forger.The Getty acquired the torso,
made its own comparison, and could not decide if
the kouros was genuine or not. To this day, the
enigma continues.
Staying clear of 
costly court cases
With these thorns in its side, the Getty
announced in 1995 that it was turning a new leaf,
“with an interest in channeling our resources in
new directions,” wrote True in a press release.
“ We will be directing energies toward sponso-
ring international conservation, education, and
research projects that will lead to exhibitions and
publications, as well as exchanges and long-term
loans of important works of antiquity from
museums here and abroad.” The Getty also
announced a major shift in its acquisitions policy,
which True described  in The Art Newspaper:
“Now we would only consider buying from an
established collection that is known to the world,
so that we do not have the issue of undocumented
provenance.”
MARK ROSE
MANAGING EDITOR OF THE MAGAZINE ARCHAEOLOGY
The G e t t y ’s mea culpa
Breaking with its freewheeling past, the well-endowed California
museum is abiding to a new credo: no more dubious acquisitions, and a
commitment to protecting the world’s archaeological heritage
2 . S AVING OUR T R E A S U R E S
Fragments of the drinking cup signed by the potter Eu

museum with an eye toward the Fleischman col-
lection acquisition? Why not 1970, the date of the
UNESCO Convention, or 1983, the date of the
C o n v e n t i o n ’s implementing legislation in the
United States? True says that no agreement or
understanding existed concerning the eventual
donation of the collection to the Getty. “ Th i s
a c q u i s i t i o n ,” she told The Art Newspaper in 1996,
“is in line with exactly what we said we would
d o.” According to her, the Getty even turned
down some objects the Fleischmans bought after
the 1994-1995 exhibition.
Even if there was no prior agreement, t h i s
acquisition shows the limitations of the Getty’s
new policy. Was the Fleischman collection “esta-
blished” and do the objects from it have a “well-
documented provenance?”The youth’s head that
True escorted back certainly did: the storeroom in
Venosa from which it was stolen. But that may
only be the tip of the iceberg. In a revealing ana-
lysis, researchers from the Cambridge University
Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology found
that 92 percent of the catalogue entries had no
fin d s p o t , and 70 percent of the objects had become
publicly known in the exhibition.
Waiting for the 
trickle-down effect
Despite these reservations, the Getty can no
longer be labelled the voracious acquisitor it was
in the past.Moreover, its considerable resources
are to be directed in constructive ways, including
site conservation.Even if it does accept collections
like the Fleischmans’,there is at least a 1995 cut-
off date. Also, True has a track record of co-ope-
rating in repatriation questions.
Has the Getty’s change in attitude caught on in
other American museums? The Metropolitan
Museum in New York has yet to return a hoard of
third-century BC silver vessels despite convincing
evidence they were looted from Morgantina in
S i c i l y. B o s t o n ’s Museum of Fine Arts has rejected
recent claims made in 1998 by Mali for terracotta
sculptures and Guatemala for Mayan vases. M o s t
disappointing was Harvard’s Arthur M. S a c k l e r
M u s e u m ’s acquisition in the mid-1990s of Greek
vase fragments and coins with dubious backgrounds,
despite a 1971 policy that Harvard would no longer
accept such items “by purchase, b e q u e s t , or gift.”
But the picture is not everywhere bleak. I n
late 1998,for example, the Denver Art Museum
voluntarily returned a Maya wooden lintel from
the site of El Zotz in Guatemala. Dated to
ca.AD 550-650, it was stolen between 1966 and
1968 and purchased by the museum in 1973.
“ When we gathered all of the information sur-
rounding the lintel’s acquisition,” said the
m u s e u m ’s director Lewis Sharp,“returning it was
simply the right thing to do.” ■
April 2001 - The UNESCO Courier 33
Was the Getty reacting to a change in tide?
Over the years, organizations such as the A r c h a e o-
logical Institute of America have been unrelenting
in their criticism of the most egregious museums,
collectors and dealers. Public opinion surveys
reveal strong support for protecting cultural heri-
tage worldwide, while active source countries —
including Tu r k e y, I t a l y,Greece and China — have
started pursuing high-profile cases in the U.S. As
a result, museums are thinking twice about acqui-
sitions that may come with costly liabilities.
But according to some observers, the Getty’s
new policy was seriously flawed.As Ricardo Elia
commented in A r ch a e o l o g y,“ The term ‘ w e l l - d o c u-
mented provenance’ refers to an object’s owner-
ship history [more exactly, the history of posses-
sion] and should not be confused with
archaeological ‘ p r o v e n a n c e,’ the findspot of an
object. The Getty’s new policy, in fact, does not
require proof that an object has been removed
from its country of origin through legal means;it
simply requires that an established record of pos-
session be documented before November 1995.
While the policy should prevent the acquisition of
antiquities looted or smuggled after this date, it
allows the museum to acquire pieces that were ille-
gally removed before it.”
The lure of
priceless collections
True’s most controversial moves involve the
Fleischman collection, some 300 Bronze A g e,
G r e e k ,R o m a n , and Etruscan antiquities,valued at
$80 million in 1996.It was exhibited at the Getty
and at the Cleveland Museum of Art in 1994 and
1 9 9 5 .Was the November 1995 date chosen by the
