O
PHILIPPE DEMENET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Economic rights:
the big comeback
Is the economic divide a root cause of the September 11 attacks? For several years, human rights
organizations have made the fight against economic injustice a top priority
ne after the other, the major NGOs cam-
paigning for civil and political rights ral-
lied in the mid-1990s to the banner of
“economic rights.” Marching behind it
was the long-established International
Federation of Human Rights Leagues
(FIDH) and its 105 national affil i a t e s
along with Human Rights Watch and its
supporters in the academic community.
Even more remarkably, the emer-
gency medical aid organization Doctors
Without Borders, which has 2,000 volun-
teers worldwide, launched a campaign in
1996 for access to basic medicines. And
fin a l l y,Amnesty International and its one
million members joined this movement
last August.
“We have to be consistent and rele-
vant,” say these organizations to explain
the move. Governments have to be criti-
cized for their failings in health and edu-
cation policy, transnational companies
for their hypocrisy in doing business in
places mired in poverty,and international
financial institutions for being blind to
the social effects of their programmes.
Beyond the Cold War
Have they been slow in waking up?
Economic rights were legally enshrined
in the International Covenant on Eco-
n o m i c, Social and Cultural Rights.
Adopted by the UN General Assembly
on December 16, 1966 (along with the
International Covenant on Civil and Po l i-
tical Rights), it came into effect 10 years
later and has been signed by 141 coun-
t r i e s. Governments are expected to take
steps to improve the living standards of
their people by ensuring adequate food,
clothing and housing, the right to a job,
training and a “fair” wage, the right to
join a trade union and go on strike, and
the right to health care and education.
For many years, the covenant was
hampered by its ambitious reach and by
the Cold Wa r. Communist countries
hailed its principles, while the We s t
remained primarily interested in civil and
political freedoms. Though they were
dedicated to defending all human rights,
some organizations such as the FIDH in
practice focused only on civil rights.
“You have to remember that in the
1970s and 1980s, many dictatorships—
communist,Latin American,Asian and
African—made defending civil rights an
absolute priority for us,” says FIDH exe-
cutive director Antoine Bernard. Th e
resurgence of economic rights was one
by-product of the collapse of the Berlin
Wall and globalization.With the spread
of the market economy,multi-party poli-
tical systems and technological change,
globalization has meant “growing wealth
for some, but destitution and despair for
many,” says Pierre Sané, former secre-
tary-general of Amnesty International,1
in the organization’s 2001 annual report.
Since the expansion of A m n e s t y ’s
m a n d a t e, its researchers and campaign
directors have felt more at ease. “Until
n o w, we were calling the famine in Sudan
the result of the forcible movement of
people in violation of their civil and poli-
tical rights,” says Amnesty researcher
Bénédicte Goderiaux.“Now we can look
at things in a different way, such as whe-
ther people have access to food.”
Avoiding
platitudes
But as Bernard points out,“ i t ’s easier
to fight for an opposition fig u r e ’s freedom
than for a change in a structural adjust-
ment policy.” Freedom may be the same
indivisible principle the world over, but
one cannot necessarily ask for the same
level of access to health care or employ-
ment in a rich country as in a poor one.
“ We have to be able to set minimum stan-
dards,” says Joanne Csete, an expert on
HIV/AIDS and children’s rights resear-
cher with Human Rights Wa t c h . “ Th a t
way even the poorest countries can start
applying them.”
Some campaigners are already
overwhelmed by the vast range of
economic rights and some enquiry
r e p o r t s read like catalogues of complaint.
Last June, Human Rights Watch publi-
shed a report on Kenyan children affected
by A I D S. After a long section on the
impact of the epidemic in A f r i c a , t h e
report called on the Kenyan government
to ensure that all children of primary
school-age attended school.“ We ’re trying
to suggest some practical steps to govern-
m e n t s,” says Csete,who wrote the report,
“but maybe we’ve been over-optimistic in
this case.”
In an effort to avoid such platitudes,
she says, Human Rights Watch has
decided to focus on “situations where
arbitrary action by governments involves
violation of economic and social rights.”
Amnesty has vowed to maintain its
traditional moral authority by pinpointing
individual rights violations, w i t h o u t
c o m m e n t , then following them up with a
thorough and impartial investigation.
“It won’t be easy.
Figuring out the effect
of an economic
investment on human
rights is much harder
than working out
how it affects
the environment.”

“ We ’re going to try to establish if someo-
n e ’s physical and mental integrity has
been violated through a denial of eco-
nomic rights,” says Salil Tr i p a t h i , w h o
runs Amnesty’s economic relations and
human rights campaign.“It won’t be easy.
Figuring out the effect of an economic
investment on human rights is much
harder than working out how it affects the
environment.”
For example, how do you measure
the impact of sealing-off the Palestinian
territories on the economic and social
rights of their inhabitants? The FIDH
has tried to do this. “ We noted the
tonnage of tomatoes exported from
G a z a , before and during the closure,”
says Bernard. “ Then we compared
t h e figures and calculated how much
income the farmers and their families
had lost.”
Another difficulty is that with the
wider field of action, there are far more
potential targets.As well as heads of state,
the usual subjects of reports and peti-
t i o n s, there are now international fin a n c i a l
institutions and multinational companies.
But these fir m s,which are private bodies,
are in no way bound by UN covenants.
“Company bosses are human beings too,”
says Amnesty spokesman Kamal Samari.
“ We can persuade them that making pro-
fits doesn’t have to go hand in hand with
a lack of morality.”
Drawing up voluntary
conduct codes
Long before Amnesty embraced
these extended goals,Sané was a pioneer
of the new approach.For four consecutive
years, he went to the annual meeting of
world economic leaders in Davos (Swit-
zerland) to plead the case for active sup-
port of human rights. He also met the
heads of oil companies and urged them to
draw up voluntary codes of conduct that
would help the firms comply with cer-
tain moral limits.
Leading human rights organizations
have chosen to work with multinational
firms rather than enter into a potentially
costly confrontation.“We don’t draw up
codes of conduct ourselves, but if a firm
asks our opinion, we emphasize two
points,” says Tripathi. “That implemen-
tation of the code should be verified regu-
larly by an independent outsider—an
a c a d e m i c,NGO or firm of auditors—and
that the code is applied at all levels of
the firm and in all its activities, not just at
headquarters.”
Some companies, such as Shell, B P,
Levi Strauss or Reebok, have adopted
codes themselves. But their behaviour
has not always been in line with their
promises, as Amnesty discovered in the
case of the Canadian oil firm Ta l i s m a n
E n e r g y, which was operating in southern
Sudan amid a civil war. In May 2000,an
Amnesty report, The Human Price of
O i l, accused government troops and their
militias of “serious human rights viola-
t i o n s ” in the region of the oilfie l d s, i n c l u-
ding massacres of civilians and forced
displacement of people.The report noted
that government troops were in charge of
protecting Talisman’s installations.
After this report and others, the com-
pany devised a code of conduct,
appointed a full-time human rights offic e r
and said it would examine its “ c o r p o r a t e
In eastern Ecuador:how do you measure the damaging effects of the oil industry on the economic rights of local inhabitants?

social responsibility”in a professionally
audited annual report.Amnesty objected
to the company’s 2000 report on grounds
that it “underplayed the serious viola-
tions being perpetrated.”
Seeking
moral approval
Multinational fir m s, eager to win any
kind of good conduct tag,are reaching out
to human rights organizations. “ Th e y
contact us regularly, saying they want our
o p i n i o n ,but they really want to use us to
get a stamp of moral approval,” says Ber-
nard.
The most damning resources human
rights organizations have for now are
“free speech” and exposing an offender to
“public disgrace.”Bernard says these are
just “symbolic weapons, but they can
damage the public reputation of a com-
pany or country.”
One result of the campaign has been
to force the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) into changing its language and
priorities. Since 1999, says the assistant
director of the IMF’s European offic e,
Sergio Pereira Leite, “we’ve been stres-
sing that social expenditure, such as health
and education, should be maintained in
countries whose balance of payments
w e ’re trying to improve. We no longer
talk about ‘structural adjustment’ pro-
grammes but ‘poverty reduction and
growth.’ Now it’s time for us to expand
our relationship with human rights orga-
nizations.”
Some bodies, such as the FIDH,
would like a stronger instrument, s u c h
as an “international economic tribunal”
where victims, represented by human
rights organizations, could lodge com-
plaints against governments and multi-
national firms for violating their eco-
nomic rights. The proposal has aroused
great hostility,but those who believe eco-
nomic rights should be a matter of law
point to the 1961 European Social
Charter adopted by the 41 member- s t a t e s
of the Council of Europe.
A committee of independent experts
who monitor the Charter’s application
hears complaints from recognized NGOs.
In 1998, Portugal was formally asked to
put an end to child labour and in 2001,
Greece was criticized for laws that
implied a version of forced labour.
“The laws of business should not be
considered as being above international
agreements on human rights,”says Sylvia
O s t r y, of Toronto University’s Munk
Center for International Studies. “ Th e
real test is probably going to be about
access to anti-AIDS drugs. South Africa
and Brazil have already rejected inter-
national business rules on intellectual
property in the name of the basic human
right to good health.” ■
1. N ow UNESCO’s assistant director-
general for social  and human
sciences.
