W
PRISCILLA B. HAYNER
PROGRAMME DIRECTOR OF THE INTERNATIONAL
CENTRE FOR TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE,NEW YORK,
AND AUTHOR OF UNSPEAKABLE TRUTHS: CONFRONTING
STATE TERROR AND ATROCITIES, (ROUTLEDGE,2001)



M o re than just the truth
Truth commissions can set in motion a process of grieving and recovery, but they are not the only
answer to confronting crimes of the past. Trials are critical, while traditional healing practices can
also assuage wounds
hen nations go through a transition from a
repressive regime to a democracy, as many
have in recent years, a state and its people
are often left with a legacy of violence,
bitterness and pain. Because it is not always
possible to prosecute hundreds of
p e r p e t r a t o r s, many new governments have
turned to mechanisms outside the judicial
system to confront the horrific crimes of a
prior regime.
More than 20 such commissions have
been created over the past two decades,
mostly in Africa and Latin America (see
b o x ) . As they are more widely used and
s t u d i e d , it has become clear that they fill a
very different role from judicial inquiries
and trials. They paint a larger picture,
looking at many thousands of victims,
whereas trials (which are critically
important as well) must,by defin i t i o n ,f o c u s
on specific events of wrongdoing, a n d
s p e c i fic perpetrators. Truth commissions
can be defined as offic i a l , t e m p o r a r y
mechanisms established to investigate a
pattern of past human rights abuses or
violations of international humanitarian
l a w.As a transitional tool,they are charged
with investigating and reporting these
a b u s e s, and recommending reforms in
order to prevent further abuses in the
f u t u r e. In the process, they serve to
acknowledge formally past wrongs that
were silenced and denied.
Perhaps the most controversial and
publicised of these was the South African
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, s e t
up in 1995. It is the only commission to
date which had the power to grant amnesty
to individual perpetrators.The very public
nature of the hearings, with both victims
and perpetrators testifying in front of
television cameras, resulted in the country
as a whole reflecting on its history and
coming to a new understanding of the past.
To be granted amnesty, p e r p e t r a t o r s
were required to make a request in writing
for specific crimes, tell the full truth about
the event,and prove that it was politically
motivated.Thus, it was not a full amnesty:
if someone killed ten people and applied
for amnesty for only five, he or she could
still be prosecuted for killing the other fiv e.
A l s o, amnesty could be denied if it was
found that the applicant did not tell the
full truth or that the crime was motivated
out of personal spite or ill-will, rather than
for political reasons.
High expectations
Though the commission had a profound
e f f e c t , it also shed light on the limitations of
such exercises. Often,the time allotted for
the commission to complete its work was
too short, and it was impossible to verify
and reach conclusions on the thousands of
cases presented. For many victims, it was
painful to watch their perpetrators walk
free after admitting to heinous crimes.Th e
expectations from the commission were
too great from the start. South A f r i c a ’s
experience teaches us that we can’t expect
the truth process to resolve all issues
pertaining to past conflict and abuse.
Reconciliation and recovery is a process
that can take generations.
There is no one truth commission
m o d e l . Countries respond to legacies of
massive political violence in different ways.
Mozambique, for example, is right next to
South Africa,and its transition took place
almost exactly at the same time. Yet here,
there was no interest in digging up the past:
the victims and general public were
exhausted from the war and didn’t want to
talk about it,while the political leadership
on both sides of the conflict were also
uninterested in looking closely at the past.
Each nation must determine what span of
time to consider, what acts or events to
i n v e s t i g a t e, and under what rules. Th e
differences will range from whether a
commission chooses to hold public hearings,
as in South A f r i c a , or undertakes its
investigations behind closed doors.
Past experience shows that there are
some basic requirements for judging
A torture victim breaks down as he testifies before South Africa’s  truth commission.

W
whether a commission’s exercise is likely to
lead to credible results that fairly refle c t
the concerns of all society. Tr u t h
commissions must have operational
i n d e p e n d e n c e, but at the same time, b e
given the necessary political and
governmental support for their work, o f t e n
including direct financial support from the
government.
We are likely to see stronger
commissions in the future, as the lessons of
past experiences are incorporated into new
and more inventive models. The new
commission in East Ti m o r, for example,
makes creative use of local customs to
promote healing and reconciliation. Th e
commission has been set up, in part, t o
help facilitate the return of low-level
perpetrators who are still in West Timor.
These include members of the militia who
were not responsible for killing, raping or
organizing violence, but who might have
taken part in the burning or looting. It is
believed that such persons would be safe
from acts of revenge once they have
admitted to their crimes, apologized for
them and agreed to carry out a community
service sentence. Likewise in Sierra Leone,
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
that is now being formed is likely to turn to
traditional and religious leaders to facilitate
its work on a local level. Wh e r e
a p p r o p r i a t e, it may facilitate such practices
as cleansing ceremonies as a way of
recognizing and honouring past events. I n
M o z a m b i q u e, traditional mechanisms were
in place that allowed people to process
conflict and pain in their own way. When
combatants came home, for example, t h e y
often went through a healing ritual where
their past sins were seen to be washed
a w a y. It is important for a country to
consider the indigenous mechanisms that
may be in place that can help it to counter
a painful past, with or without a
complementary truth commission process.
■
This article is based on an interview.
