A
cademic freedom is a highly sensitive
barometer of respect for human rights
within a society. Respect for academic
freedom indicates acceptance of open
debate and protection of differing ideas
and groups; its absence fosters a climate of ignorance
and intolerance—a perfect breeding ground for extre-
m i s m . Strong evidence for this proposition comes
from A f g h a n i s t a n , where the Ta l i b a n ’s first actions
were to shut down most higher education centres and
ban women and girls from attending school.But in less
extreme forms,governments around the world justify
violations of human rights by casting all critical thought
as an attack on public morality,national security,or cul-
tural purity. N a t u r a l l y,some of the first victims are aca-
demics whose job it is to question all aspects of their
own civilization, from its scientific theories to cultural
c o n s t r u c t s.
Attacks on academic freedom are not limited to
the Taliban or to the Islamic world. For instance,
academics have recently come under official or public
pressure in the United States and Canada for ques-
tioning various aspects of their governments’ past
or projected policies. In the current climate, the right
to speak out is of utmost importance, lest American
universities return to the dark days of anti-Commu-
nist hysteria.
During the Cold War, attacks on academic free-
dom had an apparent ideological rationale. Each side
attacked those thinkers who questioned their socie-
t y ’s reigning dogma: dissidents were subjected to
witch hunts and intellectual (and physical) exile. In
many countries, the response was more violent,
though no less predictable.Activist teachers and stu-
dents were killed, m a i m e d , jailed and silenced in
Latin A m e r i c a ,A f r i c a , and the Middle East, in China
and Korea (North and South), by governments ali-
gning themselves with one of the dominant super-
powers.
Rising
pressure
With the fall of the Berlin Wall,it was expected
that human rights—and academic freedom in parti-
cular—would improve. The belief was that there
would be no need to punish academics in a world see-
mingly focused on economic development, e s p e c i a l l y
where they were instrumental in creating and foste-
ring the newly emerging notions of financial, intel-
lectual and cultural globalization.
But the end of the Cold War and the advent of
easier global communications have placed acade-
mics even more directly in the line of fir e.Their rela-
tively high level of interaction across borders enables
them to judge their societies in comparison with
others, and to point out their governments’ shortco-
mings to their students and the public.With another
international conflict simmering,the pressure to curb
academic freedom is sure to grow.
A variety of new, troubling excuses are now
invoked to justify oppression of educators and their
students.The politics of ethnic and religious identity
In the line of fire
In the name of ethnic purity, religious conviction or even secularism,
scholars and their students are targets of oppression in a large swathe of
countries. Academics are stepping up efforts to marshal public opinion
2 . POWER T R A P S
SAM ZIA-ZARIFI
DIRECTOR OFTHE ACADEMIC FREEDOM PROGRAMME AT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

are chief among them,as governments define them-
selves as protectors of a particular orthodoxy—be it
ethnic purity, religious conviction or even secula-
rism—and persecute those who question it.
Academics in predominantly Muslim countries
have borne the heaviest burden of this new type of
o p p r e s s i o n .From Indonesia and Malaysia to Pakistan,
throughout Central Asia and the Middle East and all
the way to North Africa, scholars and their students
face tremendous pressure. These countries fall under
three broad categories.
First are those countries where religion is an offi-
cial part of the governing ideology. In Afghanistan,
P a k i s t a n , Iran and Saudi A r a b i a , governments justify
attacks against their academic critics on the basis of
ostensibly protecting the faith.In Pakistan this year,
a professor of hygiene was sentenced to die for ques-
tioning whether the Prophet of Islam would have
been able to observe proper religious demands before
his divine ordination.In Iran,where academics and
students have been debating the concordance of their
ancient religion and the modern world, scores of
scholars (including several clerics and theologians)
have been jailed for supposedly insulting religious sen-
s i t i v i t i e s. In these countries, harsh repression is often
excused by the supposed threat posed by foreign
ideas.
S e c o n d , where the govern-
ments have officially embraced a
“secular,” non-religious ideology,
like Turkey and many of the
Central Asian republics,even exhi-
biting piety can lead to official
harassment.Invoking a nebulous
Islamic threat to their orders,
authoritarian governments have
maintained their rule by restric-
ting all scholars who criticize it.
Th i r d , in the majority of predo-
minantly Muslim countries, governments have used
the supposed tension between Islam and the West to
justify years of administrative mismanagement, fiscal
c o r r u p t i o n , and political repression.Tunisia and Egypt,
two countries cast as stalwart allies of the We s t ,t o l e r a t e
neither religious nor liberal criticism of their govern-
m e n t s. I n s t e a d , pious scholars are silenced based on the
supposed threat they pose to the political order; the offi-
cially sanctioned religious establishment is then molli-
fied by government attacks on academics who criti-
cize injustice using the language of liberal democracy.
The politics of ethnic identity have also fuelled
attacks on academics. In Yu g o s l a v i a , social scientists
and historians were called upon to justify the excesses
of ethnic rivalry.When this attempt invariably failed,
the Milosevic government initiated a purge of Serbian
u n i v e r s i t i e s. In Indonesia, academics in areas with
ethnically distinct populations—such as the restive
Aceh province—came under pressure from the
government to squelch any discussion of greater local
a u t o n o m y.In Tu r k m e n i s t a n , the teaching of all foreign
languages has been banned in the name of fostering
Turkmen science.
A troubling new dimension of the limits imposed
on scholarship has been the “ p r i v a t i z a t i o n ”of assaults
on academic freedom. Militant opposition groups
are increasingly willing and able to attack academics
who call for reason.In Spain,academics in favour of
a peaceful resolution of Basque demands suffer inti-
midation at the hands of the separatist movement.
And in Colombia, both pro-government paramili-
tary groups and the guerrillas they fight have taken to
attacking universities in order to silence their critics.
But there is a significant countervailing trend.In
the past few years, academics have been increasingly
willing and able to work on behalf of their oppressed
colleagues. All the characte-
ristics that mark scholars and
students for persecution—
their critical minds, t h e i r
access to information from
inside and outside their own
borders—also allow them to
defend each other.
The response of the aca-
demic community worldwide
to China’s arrest earlier this
year of several scholars on
espionage charges is instruc-
tive. Over 400 China specialists from some 15 coun-
tries signed a petition in support of the scholars, cal-
ling on the Chinese government to substantiate its
charges and to adhere to domestic and international
standards of judicial process.The petition was released
to the media with the cooperation of several promi-
nent academic groups. The U. S. government inter-
ceded with China on behalf of those academics who
were American citizens or residents. Three were
released soon after they had been convicted by tri-
bunals widely described as falling short of proper
judicial standards.While international academic sup-
port played a pivotal role, several scholars—the exact
number is unknown—languish in detention on vague
and unsubstantiated charges.
The international community of scholars can
lobby effectively on behalf of persecuted colleagues,
but this requires cooperation over time—precisely the
support offered by the Human Rights Watch aca-
demic freedom programme, and more broadly, the
Network on Education and Academic Rights. ■

The characteristics
that mark scholars
and students
for persecution also
allow them to defend
each other.
