César Carrillo*:
“The right to life in Colombia”
What do you think of the new tendency of many NGOs to include
economic rights alongside their demands for civil and political rights?
Many of them hadn’t previously considered us defenders of human rights,
but they’re looking at things differently now. In Colombia, trade unionists
have fought hardest for civil and political rights, as well as for economic
rights. In our country, the priority today is defending the right to life. Our
union has organized activities to expose the abuse many communities suf-
fer and to defend the victims. We also campaign against the government’s
failure to address human rights violations.
Many people have been killed in these campaigns.
Trade unionists in today’s Colombia are heroes. More trade unionists are
murdered here than in any other country on earth. Figures compiled by the
Workers’ Trade Union (USO) show that 10,000 trade union members are
directly under threat.Amnesty International listed the murders of 112 trade
unionists in Colombia last year and 93 more up to August this year. More
than 50 members of the USO alone have been killed in recent years. In my
view, this is because criticism of us has been distorted to link us with the
guerrillas, making us a target for the paramilitary. And the state doesn’t do
enough to protect us against these attacks.
Do you see any difference between violations of economic rights and
human rights?
The most important rights for me are civil and political rights. Mine have
been violated because I’m prevented from carrying out my trade union
work.Having said that,economic rights are basic ones that enable people
to lead a decent life. But, as I say, more important than that is the right
to life itself. ■
Interview by Asbel López, UNESCO Courier journalist
* César Carrillo was head of Colombia’s main oil industry union, the much-per -
secuted Unión Sindical Obrera (Workers’ Trade Union, USO), from 1988 to
1995. He and 15 colleagues were arrested in 1996, and Carrillo spent
18months in prison. At the end of 1998, following the murder of his lawyer,
Eduardo Umaña Mendoza, he was forced into exile after receiving death
threats.
