Since ancient times, people have
marvelled at the night sky and sought
answers to profound questions there. What
are the heavenly bodies? What moves them?
How do they affect one another? Where are
they? And how do they affect us? These are
questions of cosmology, and each age and
culture has produced its own answers.
To the modern astronomer, acceptable
answers come from physics. But if I may
point my telescope not just towards deep
space but also back in time, I would suggest
that modern answers continue to draw upon
deep-seated cultural values.
R e l i g i o n , social practices and
observational astronomy have long been
intertwined in the development of
cosmological beliefs.The ancient Egyptians
observed the dawn risings of key stars and
from them established not only their
agricultural calendar and civil timekeeping,
but also their religious rites. Two thousand
years of observations gathered by
Babylonian astronomer-priests gave rise to
mathematical planetary astronomy, w h i c h
Greek philosophers such as Aristotle used as
the basis for their physical models of the
cosmos. Aristotle’s cosmos was structured,
hierarchical, finite, and compatible with the
tenets of Christianity, Ju d a i s m , and Islam.
God was Prime Mover of the planets and the
unmoved foundation of a stable world
system.
In the 17th century, the A r i s t o t e l i a n
cosmos gave way to the Newtonian world
view. Looking out into an infinite universe,
Isaac Newton showed how the motions of the
stars, planets,and comets were all governed
by universal gravitation.Comets circulated
vital spirits and fuel to the stars, but could
also slam into worlds, causing mass
extinctions and global destruction.
In 1755, Immanuel Kant offered a
physical theory on the origin and evolution of
the universe. He described how universal
forces of attraction and repulsion,acting on
matter diffused throughout space, gave rise to
instabilities in the chaos, leading to physical
and chemical complexity. Denser regions
gravitationally attracted lesser ones, w h i l e
the action of repulsive forces caused in-falling
matter to swirl around the dense centres.
Over time, these vortices collapsed into stellar
systems containing suns, p l a n e t s, and comets.
Creation thus spread out from a central
point into the chaos and animated the whole
region of infinite space. But Kant observed,
“whatever has a beginning and origin,has the
mark of its limited nature in itself; it must
perish and have an end.” When a world-
system exhausted all the manifold variations
that its structure could embrace, it perished
in a violent confla g r a t i o n .The universe was,
Kant envisioned,a “phoenix of nature,w h i c h
burns itself only in order to revive again in
restored youth from its ashes, through all
the infinity of times and spaces.”
K a n t ’s book was one of the earliest
attempts to describe the origin and evolution
of the cosmos under the influence of
universal natural laws. Prior to Kant,it was
commonly held that creation was fixed and
the universe was maintained in a steady state.
So where did Kant’s modern evolutionary
ideas come from? From popular culture as
remade by Newton.
Until the 17th century, people believed
that comets were divine signs heralding
imminent world change. Newton appropriated
this popular belief when he portrayed comets
as natural agents deployed by God to create,
r e n o v a t e, or destroy heavenly bodies, t h u s
melding popular beliefs with physics.This new
approach gave license to those who held that
material forces created new solar systems and
the universe evolved according to natural laws.
If popular beliefs were formative in the
early development of modern cosmology,
should we be worried that they continue to
sully current science? Not at all.We can still
celebrate the ways our diverse cultural
heritages have shaped our scientific inquiries.
Cosmology is ultimately a human endeavour.
In asking questions about the deep past and
distant future, it draws from many rich
traditions and brings us closer together as
human beings. ■
A PHOENIX OF HUMAN NAT U R E
BY SARA SCHECHNER
DAVID P. WHEATLAND CURATOR OF THE COLLECTION OF HISTORICAL SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS, HARVARD UNIVERSITY
