INTERVIEW BY
CYNTHIA GUTTMAN
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



OECD countries allocate one to two perc e n t
of their education budgets to information
and communication technology (ICT). H o w
far have they come in making them real
learning tools?
Relatively speaking,education hasn’t
even begun to look at what the implica-
tions are, and they are huge. On average,
OECD countries spend around 0.25 per-
cent of their education budgets on
research and development compared to
seven percent for certain sectors of
industry. As a result, we still know very
little about ICT impact on individual lear-
n i n g, and teachers are not being equipped
with the necessary skills to use these new
tools.
So schools are being equipped without
much thought about the next step?
Here there is a paradox. ICT can help
students develop a range of skills required
by the modern economy, such as learning
how to learn, problem-solving, knowing
how to acquire and evaluate informa-
t i o n , but these are not reflected in the
school curriculum.Teachers are not going
for open-ended inquiries and the
exchange of ideas with other schools and
p e o p l e. Leaving exams at the end of
secondary school are still broadly based
on a corps of knowledge and the ability to
p r o d u c e.Why should teachers invest time
in developing new techniques that are
not sufficiently valued by the system? A t
the same time, those who are doing so
run the risk of prejudicing their students’
chances at exams.
Is ICT nonetheless changing the teacher’s
role?
I recoil strongly from the idea of the
teacher just being there when a student is
having trouble. It suggests an aimless kind
of educational experience. Learning is a
planned exercise.But the pace of change
ushered in by computer technology has
made us more aware than ever that know-
ledge is transient.We cannot see the tea-
cher as someone who gets pumped up at
university and repeats the same lessons
for the next 40 years. Teachers have to
develop more ties with universities and be
well enough connected within society to
know whom to turn to and ask questions,
on a basis of mutual respect.
How could training be improved?
Teachers have to be empowered to
use ICT. If professional development
could take place online and provide  tea-
chers with resources to integrate ICT,
they would gain confidence in these tech-
n o l o g i e s. Po o r-quality software is ano-
ther big obstacle. The way forward is to
encourage dialogue between manufac-
turers and teachers in order to decide
what type of software is required and
what is feasible,both technically and eco-
n o m i c a l l y. This is just beginning to
happen.
Is ICT economically viable?
Most computers have five-year write-
off periods at the very most. How do you
justify putting enormous amounts of
hardware into a school open six hours a
day, 40 weeks a year, when in five years,
things will be obsolete anyway? Th e r e
are universities where facilities are open
around the clock,allowing users to plug
in when they wish.The school should also
give the community a chance to take
advantage of its facilities. For example,
technically skilled students could receive
modest honoraria for doing work in the
evenings at school. You have to see the
school as part of the community, n e t w o r-
king in both directions, rather than as a
walled entity. ■

Time for schools to tune into
the information age
Schools still have to make a quantum leap if they are to prepare students
for the information society, says Edwyn James, of the OECD Centre for
Educational Research and Innovation
