Y ou often lament the gap between the aca-
demic world and pressing social re a l i t i e s.
You certainly feel that in A f r i c a .I ’ m
living at the epicentre of an HIV/AIDS
e p i d e m i c : the province of KwaZulu
Natal has the highest rate of infection in the world.
In this context,AIDS becomes a human rights issue.
I don’t know that universities are engaging enough
in addressing such issues on public platforms at a
time when social justice is so manifestly not part of
our world.Yet it is our social responsibility to do so.
Whether you call it academic freedom or university
a u t o n o m y, academics are a kind of independent
estate which should be providing intellectual lea-
d e r s h i p,all the more so in these very difficult times.
Not doing so can only be regarded as an ethical
f a i l u r e. I also worry, h o w e v e r, about a creeping anti-
intellectualism that undervalues the reflective
impulse in favour of a tough-minded and  often
short-sighted pragmatism.
How can the university go about addressing poverty
and inequality? 
In the late 1980s, we took the bull by the horns
and started a “Strategic Initiatives”dialogue during
which we engaged with many different communities
in the country by asking how the university could
accommodate their concerns and play a role in the
transition from apartheid to democracy.This helped
us to anticipate and to talk with a wide range of
people, some of whom we saw as part of a govern-
ment-in-waiting.
Take the example of our agricultural faculty.
For years it focused on training commercial far-
mers. Today, it has broadened its focus to include
small-scale farming, food security and poverty alle-
v i a t i o n ,and the faculty has lost none of its standing.
There are other issues with which the university
should be intensely e n g a g i n g. Law faculties, f o r
e x a m p l e, should be taking the lead in framing A I D S
as a human rights issue.
Fe a rs are often voiced about academic freedom being
undermined by economic pre s s u re s. Do you expe-
rience this in your daily work?
I have confidence in our ability to draw the line
and to walk away from whatever is going to
compromise our integrity. All over the world the
public purse is being stretched to accommodate rising
numbers of students in higher education.I have spent
a large amount of my time trying to secure funding.
I put funders on the line just as I put academics on the
line. With regard to medical and social research on
H I V / A I D S, a field in which we are very active, I
appeal to the moral conscience of funders. I remind
them we are all living in the midst of one of the grea-
test catastrophes that has befallen humankind.
Does the university have to be organized differe n t l y
to play an effective role in society?
I argue vigorously for universities to actively
try and make their borders more permeable, more
porous.We cannot pretend to know everything, or
to represent all society’s constituents and interests.
Yet they are all important to intellectual life and to
an understanding of what universities can contri-
bute. Partnerships are essential to this understan-
ding.
Not only with the corporate world however.
By no means. We’ve had remarkable partner-
ships with community organizations dating back
to the apartheid era when we housed 84 NGOs on
our campus. This was extremely beneficial for the
u n i v e r s i t y : we were exposed to a wide range of
social issues, notably demand from NGOs for sup-
port in conceiving and managing projects.NGOs are
the fastest growing movement in the world and
universities are not doing enough to create educa-
tion for future leaders in this fie l d .To meet demand,
we recently created a Centre for Civil Society which
focuses on NGO-related study. I ’ve also pushed
very hard to get a compulsory community service
component integrated into our degree programme.
It’s a very powerful learning tool but also a very
effective way of getting things done on the ground
because you can harness so many students to the col-
lective effort.
Do think there is a need for an international instru-
ment on academic freedom,as has been proposed?
Yes. We’ve seen terrible infringements on aca-
demic freedom in Africa and elsewhere. If other aca-
demics don’t speak up about these violations, who
will? None of us can be complacent in any way
about the dangers of such violations. ■
* Professor Gourley is also Vice-Chancellor elect
of the Open University in the United Kingdom.
INTERVIEW BY CYNTHIA GUTTMAN
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
B e i n g on alert
Academics around the world should be engaging much more forcefully in
the search for social justice, says Brenda Gourley, vice-chancellor of the
University of Natal in South Africa* 
