BEETHOVEN 
TAMES THE JUNGLE
by
D m itri
Shostakovich
A great Soviet composer 
presents his views 
on music without frontiers
I  HE interaction and the play 
of mutual influences between the mu­
sical cultures of W est and East, of 
peoples brought up in the traditions of 
European musical thought and the peo­
ples of the rest o f the world, con­
stitutes a key factor fo r the under­
standing of the evolution of national 
musical traditions.
In this connexion, I fu lly  agree with 
those who rightly point out how wrong 
it is to use the term "developing 
countries” with regard to the ancient 
and great cultures of the Asian, A fri­
can and Latin American states. W here­
as these countries may lag behind 
Europe and North America industrially, 
it is highly ¡inappropriate to speak of 
them patronizingly as “ developing” in 
the sphere o f the arts.
To what extent can the means of 
expression accumulated over the cen­
turies by one people be used o r sub­
ordinated to the artistic norms of 
another national cu lture? To me the 
question of the so-called “ incompati­
b ility ” o f modal and harmonic sys­
tems, of the “ harm or benefit” which 
the polyphonic or harmonic devices 
characteristic o f European music bring 
to the cultural heritage of the coun­
tries o f the East, is not entirely clear.
But of one thing I am firm ly con­
vinced, namely the basic equality in 
human culture of all the various natio­
nal musical traditions, the whole rich 
fund o f melodies, rhythms, timbres and 
subtle poetic discoveries created by 
fo lk singers, instrumentalists and pro­
fessional composers.
To my mind, the point is not the
“ compatibility" or “ incompatibility” 
o f the various musical systems, but 
how  and by which methods the prob­
lem of the interaction and mutual in­
fluence of the cultures of peoples dif­
fering from one another ethnically and 
geographically is solved.
Here everything depends on the 
artistic tact and talent of the people 
concerned— the composer, performer,; 
teacher or theoretician— their sense of 
responsibility to  the art and their pro­
fessional honesty.
They may, of course, encounter 
many a stumbling-blqck. There is 
always the great danger of standardi­
zation, o f reducing the musical cul­
tures of various peoples to the 
“ average European level".
And one can well understand the 
concern o f people who are closely in­
volved in guiding these processes, 
who are connected with training pro­
fessional musicians for their country, 
and who are familiar with a ir the forms 
of propagating music.
One cannot allow of a thoughtless 
or, worse still, commercial approach, 
a disregard for the great humanist tra­
ditions of all the peoples of our planet. 
Such a course could lead to the des­
truction of century-old artistic values 
and to the burying of one’s own natio­
nal heritage in oblivion.
But nor should one attempt to iso­
late the art o f this or that people from 
the natural exchange of creative 
achievements between'/nations, from 
the mutual borrowing of elements in 
the various systems o f musical 
thought and musical speech.
CO N TINUED  NEXT PAGE
Dmitri Shostakovich, left of photo, holding fire-hose to extinguish incendiary 
bombs in Leningrad during World War II. Shostakovich wrote the first three 
movements of his 7th Symphony (“Leningrad”) in 1941 during the siege of the city.
DMITRI SHOSTAKOVICH is the world 
famous Soviet composer. He has written 
more than a dozen symphonies as well as 
ballets, operas, chamber music, choral works 
and film scores. The article presented here 
is an address given by Shostakovich at an 
international music congress held in Moscow 
in 1971 on traditional and contemporary 
music, organized by the International Music 
Council and the Soviet National Music Com­
mittee.
Dimitri Shostakovich died in 197$.

Caruso and 
Chaliapin: 
the centenary 
of two
‘Mastersingers’
This year the whole world is celebrating the 
centenary of the birth of tw o great singers 
T^the bass Fedor Ivanovich Chaliapin and 
the tenor Enrico Caruso. Born at Kazan 
(USSR), Chaliapin quickly won inter­
national fame not only for his stupendous 
voice, but also for his skill as an actor which 
enabled him to  interpret such great roles as 
Strauss’ Don Quixote (left) and Mussorgsky's 
Boris Godunov, on the principal stages of 
the world. Caruso was born in Naples 
(Italy). The exceptional purity and power of 
his voice earned him world-w ide acclaim 
and a reputation as one of the greatest 
tenors of all time. His prestige is still so; 
great that a London street-musician (right) 
can attract an audience merely by advertising 
"songs of Caruso".
BEETHOVEN TA M ES  THE JUNGLE (Continued)
One of the natural and logical forms 
of development of the national tradi­
tion is not only its direct link with the 
life around it, w ith new social condi­
tions and the growth of people's 
awareness but also its ability to 
absorb and enrich itself from every­
thing that is genuinely progressive in 
the ideo log ica l^ and technological 
sense, «which is created by other tradi­
tio n s , sometimes even very remote 
ones.
Naturally, this process must take 
the form of mutual exchange and not 
be imposed from outside. To illustrate 
these remarks 1 should like to men­
tion a few well-known facts from the 
history of Russian music.
Did not Borodin, Balakirev, Mus­
sorgsky and Rimsky-Korsakov enrich 
their work by turning to individual spe­
cimens or elements of the fo lklore of 
the peoples of the East? How much 
poorer Russian music would be 
without Borodin’s Polovtsian Dances, 
Balakirev’s Islarriey, Mussorgsky's Per­
sian Dance and Rimsky-Korsakov’s 
Scheherazade and many other pages 
of Russian music about the East.
And then there is the dedicated 
work of a number of Moscow and 
Leningrad composers In the Central 
Asian republics, where an incredibly 
short period of time saw the emer­
gence of national schools of compo­
sition using the experience of Russian 
and W est European music to build their 
own national cultures.
The experience o f my country— I 
have in mind the period after the vic­
tory of the Great October Revolution—  
testifies to the fact that the efforts of 
several generations of Soviet musi­
cians to build a musical culture fo r all 
the peoples of the U.S.S.R. were 
directed along the right lines.
In order to appreciate the greatness 
of this task presented by history It­
self one must be able to envisage the 
vast size o f our country and the great 
variety of geographical and ethnic con­
ditions which mould the life and cha­
racter of its peoples, who speak and 
sing in a hundred and five languages.
In the complex process of founding 
a musical culture fo r the Soviet peo­
ples an important part is played by 
Russian classical music and the fine
traditions of the Russian school of 
composers. These traditions are 
deeply rooted in the everyday life drtfljjj 
culture of the Russian people. They 
have been further developed io-. tbe . 
new conditions of socialist life in- our 
multinational state.
The last thing I should want is that 
the development of our musical, cu l­
ture— composition, performing, teach­
ing and musicology— should appear 
to be smooth and entirely free from 
contradictions and difficulties. We 
have also had our difficulties and mis­
takes and irritating failures.
Nevertheless I am convinced that 
the direction of our searching was and 
remains a correct and fruitfu l one. 
This may be seen from the truly his­
toric accomplishments in the building 
of a progressive culture and art in the 
Soviet Asian republics which can be 
measured by quantitative and, more 
importantly, qualitative data of an In­
disputable kind.
The intensive advance of Soviet 
musical culture in breadth, embracing 
millions of people in all parts of o u r| 
country, has developed and Is still

developing in depth, enriching our 
lives with bold, truly innovatory finds 
and: d iscoverie^d^
It should suffice to mention here the 
name of the great composer Sergei 
Prokofiev, who has given a mighty im­
pulse to the creative searchings o f  
many composers and performers all 
over the world. Another of. Prokofiev’s 
great contributions is his profoundly 
original discovery of the riches of Rus­
sian, and not only Russian, folkfmusic. 
f f ls h o w  ju s S ik e  to mention h ig 'flne  
second string quartet on Kabardinian- 
Balkar themes.
The world-famous composer Aram 
Khachaturian, who has d^lyed deep 
into the music of the Transcaucasian 
peoples, has succeeded in using this, 
basis to create symphonic works 
which have greatly influenced the 
developmental’: firs t and foremost, 
but not exclusively of his native A r |  
menian music.
The same can be said of the. crea­
tive role of the talented composer 
Kara Karayev who stands at the head 
o f an interesting and most promising 
schoolfipf composers in Soviet Azer­
baijan.
To my mind, those who support 
"protective tendencies” with respect 
to the musical cultures of non-Euro­
pean peoples, are somehow ignoring 
the realities, the generally! recognized
artistic values which have been and, 
■ am  convinced, w ill be created as a 
result of the bold, creative interven­
tion of the domposer in a sphere 
which is at firs t alien to him.
While rejecting the crude repression 
of one culture by another and the 
views current in  the West about cul­
tural genocide and the implanting of an 
alien musical culture, we cannot never­
theless agree with the appeals fo r 
complete isolation of one musical sys­
tem from another for the sake of pre­
serving these cultures in their orig inal 
purity.
I■■tET the Asian and African 
peoples who i;have created a high 
culture and a rich original folklore, 
develop their art and perfect th'e'ir 
musical speech, but at the same time 
let them not close their ears to the 
great achievements in the music of 
other peoples.
I remember the unforgettable im­
pression which a certain documentary 
left on me. It was a film- 'about the 
life of what appeared to be a very 
primitive Indi&n tribe living in an 
almost inaccessible area somewhere 
in the upper reaches of the Amazon.
Thesfi was a really moving scene in
it, where the chief and several o f the 
tribesmen listened to a tape-record- 
ing of the Beethoven violin concerto. 
On the faces of these people, who 
had just been shown at work, hunt­
ing, in ¿primitive everyday life, 
one saw extremely strong emotions 
verging on shock. Beethoven was 
addressing himself to a person from 
another world and that person was lis­
tening -to his speech and understand- 
ing U I
This seems to me to suggest the 
following conclusion. Music does not 
allow of nati'onaHimitations and does 
not need protective measures aimed 
at isolating one culture from another.
On the contrary, what is required 
is that countries possessing more 
developedfifneans of spreading musi­
cal culture, highly qualified specialists 
and teachers should come to the aid of 
peoples who suffered centuries o j  
colonial rule without the opportunity to 
develop their national culture freely.
O f course, this help should not turn 
into cultural “ aggression” . And musi­
cians who are sincerely concerned 
about the fate of music the whole 
world over, must try to find a common' 
language for affirming and preserving 
the great cultural values,. those which 
the peoples of the world have already 
created and those which they are sure 
to create in the future. ■
