LOUISE CORRADINI 
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Children in chains
At the start of the new millennium, the trafficking and exploitation of children is one of the world’s
greatest scandals, enslaving around 100 million youngsters. Getting the upper hand on it means
attacking the root causes of poverty and boosting law enforcement
n 1997,police in New York discovered
a network of 55 deaf-mute children
selling key-rings in the city’s subway
s y s t e m . The Jackson Heights Deaf-
M u t e s, as the press called them, h a d
been brought from Mexico by a gang
specializing in selling defenceless chil-
dren into slavery. At the end of an 18-
hour day, they were expected to bring
their bosses $100. Paid nothing, t h e y
were subjected to violent physical
abuse.
This episode revealed that child
slavery was indeed taking place in the
heart of Western civilization.A c c o r d i n g
to U. S. government estimates, b e t w e e n
700,000 and two million women and
children are sucked into this illegal trade
every year worldwide.
When the youngsters arrive in a for-
eign country, far away from their fami-
l i e s, they are at the mercy of their
e m p l o y e r s. I s o l a t e d , they are put to
work in plantations, f a c t o r i e s, c o n-
struction sites or domestic service. Or
else they are forced to beg or become
child prostitutes.Often confined in their
w o r k p l a c e s, they toil in hazardous con-
d i t i o n s. In short, they are treated as
slaves.
The stories of Charles Dickens,
Victor Hugo, Emile Zola and Edmundo
d’Amicis about exploitation of children
in the 19th century are comparable to
what child slaves have to endure at the
dawn of the new millennium.
The phenomenon cannot be sepa-
rated from the much broader reality of
child labour.The International Labour
Organization (ILO) reckoned in 1995
that 73 million children under the age of
10 were “economically active” world-
w i d e. On this ground, new forms of
exploitation have developed. Due to
the illegal nature of child slavery and
trafficking, it is extremely difficult to
collect data on its extent,but several
recent studies give some idea of the
sheer magnitude of the problem.
Staggering
figures
• Every year, around 200,000
women and children are victims of the
trade in Southeast Asia,according to
the International Organization for
Migration (IOM).Tr a f ficked children
are being forced into sweatshops,
brothels and begging on the streets.
• Between 100,000 and 150,000
Nepalese women and girls were sent in
1995 to India,where they were sexually
exploited, reports the Committee on
the Rights of the Child. The Bangla-
desh National Women Lawyers’ A s s o-
ciation reports that more than 13,000
children were trafficked out of
Bangladesh in the last five years.
• UNICEF estimates that there
are 200,000 child slaves in West and
Central Africa.
• In June 2000, Human Rights
Watch denounced the practice of
employing children in slave-like con-
ditions on U. S. f a r m s. About 50,000
women and children enter the United
States each year to be used as slaves,
the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency
admitted in April 2000.
• In Brazil, 40,000 children are sold
every year to work on farms and as
domestic servants.The traffickers lure
girls with promises of jobs in restau-
rants in remote parts of the Amazon.
Once there, they are forced to work in
nightclubs and moved from one
mining community to another.
• Girls from Guatemala, H o n d u r a s
and El Salvador are taken to Mexico
and sold to brothels for $100 or $200
e a c h , according to Casa A l i a n z a , a
human rights NGO that defends chil-
dren in danger in the region (see page
40). In Nicaragua, an average of one
child disappears every three days.
From Nepal to Nigeria or Brazil,
the methods are the same.Traffickers
Symbols of exploitation:the hands of a young boy employed in a Colombian brick-making factory.

win the confidence of the parents with
a small amount of money or clothes
and the children are then entrusted to
t h e m . The recruiters promise to look
after the children and find them a job
that will help raise the standard of living
of the whole family.
Trafficking in children arises from
p o v e r t y, the decline of the extended
f a m i l y, lack of education for the chil-
dren and of other sources of income
for the family. But the illicit trade is
also a result of how some societies
regard children.The parents themselves
are often reponsible for the enslave-
ment of their offspring, seeing them as
an investment and hoping they will be
able to make some contribution to the
family income, either in cash or in kind.
This view creates fertile ground for child
labour and trafficking to develop.
Offences that
go unpunished
In strongly patriarchal societies,
women and children have little or no
freedom, which explains the extensive
discrimination against girls, w h o s e
exploitation for sexual purposes or as
domestic servants is seen to a certain
extent as “normal.”
The absence of national legislation
aimed at punishing such trafficking
makes things easier for the go-betweens
and the employers. There is no agreed
definition of the crime nor a common
standard for penalties.In some countries
charges can be pressed in court, but this
is very rare.I n e f ficiencies in law enforce-
m e n t , including lack of political will and
corruption,perpetuate the problem.
Lasting scars
The ILO’s International Programme
on the Elimination of Child Labour
(IPEC) is striving to find solutions to the
p r o b l e m . Based on past experience,
IPEC has started several projects to
help governments combat traffic k i n g
of children in A f r i c a , Asia and Latin
A m e r i c a .These aim to raise awareness
of the issue and free children from
exploitative work by tackling the root
causes of poverty, i g n o r a n c e, i n a d e q u a t e
educational systems and law enforce-
m e n t , as well as the lack of remunerative
employment for adults.
The dreadful conditions which traf-
ficked children work in and their contact
with dangerous machinery and mate-
r i a l s, as well as the harsh discipline
meted out to them, do not simply harm
their health. It also subjects them to
severe psychological trauma. S e p a r a-
tion from their families, the coercion
involved in all trafficking, made worse
by sexual abuse of child domestics,
street children and prostitutes, makes
them prone to depression. For many of
these victims, this torment paves the
way to a life of crime or drug addic-
tion. ■
