I
n many African countries, academics have
found that the threats to their  freedom have
profoundly changed over the past decade.
Political pressure has steadily given way to
economic constraints.
After independence, academic freedom was
not a priority for the new states and some even
dubbed it a “bourgeois concept.” A university
was supposed to serve the nation and its develop-
ment—by working with the government. Th i s
very quickly led to repression of dissent, a l o n g
with the arrest and imprisonment of many uni-
versity teachers and students and,under the har-
shest regimes, even their murder. U n i v e r s i t i e s,
which had grown from six in the early 1960s to 120
by the late 1990s (excluding South A f r i c a ) ,b e c a m e
a thorn in the side of the dictatorships.
When generals
take the reins
To dampen these hotbeds of subversion,sub-
jects considered dangerous were simply banned.
After 1968 student riots,political science and socio-
logy were forbidden in Rwanda and Senegal.A few
years later, law was banned from universities in
Mozambique. There was censorship everywhere,
especially in Ke n y a , Malawi and South A f r i c a
under the apartheid regime.
More recently, troops occupied the campus of
Lumumbashi University (in the former Zaire in
1 9 9 0 ) , police attacked students in Yopougon (Côte
d’Ivoire in 1991), many dissident Hutu and Tutsi
university teachers were killed during the 1994
Rwandan genocide, intellectuals were murdered in
Algeria and Nigeria’s military rulers liquidated
university administrators and replaced them with
former generals.
But in the last 10 years or so,African academics
have seen their fields of research expand as govern-
ments have embarked on the road to democracy.
Their lives are at risk now in only a few countries,
such as Burundi, and censorship is fading.
Other threats have arisen however.At the end
of the 1990s, one out of three countries in sub-
Saharan Africa was at war. Many universities were
destroyed (see box below on Sierra Leone) or
reduced to virtually nothing.To d a y, the main threat
to academic freedom in Africa is economic. B a d l y
paid university teachers often have several other
jobs and little time for research.Lack of access to
information technology and other means of
BASED ON AN INTERVIEW WITH EBRIMA SALL
A GAMBIAN RESEARCHER AT THE SWEDISH-FUNDED NORDIC AFRICA INSTITUTEAND FORMER HEAD OFAN ACADEMIC FREEDOMPROJECTWITH CODESRIA (THE
COUNCILFOR DEVELOPMENT OF ECONOMICAND SOCIAL RESEARCH IN AFRICA,
BASED IN DAKAR, SENEGAL)



African scholars:
too p o o r to be f re e
The governments of many African countries have eased their pressure on
universities but economic interests are now turning up the heat, as
market value becomes a yardstick for measuring relevance

A research lab at Kano University, in Nigeria.

research and publishing further marginalize
African researchers from the global academic
community.
The universities, which have been “ s a c r i fic e d ”
over the past 20 years on the altar of structural
adjustment programmes, are desperately short of
money. There are more and more strikes—often
brutally suppressed—and some institutions are
trying to work together to meet
the new challenges of globali-
zation. One positive develop-
ment is that in the era of the
knowledge economy, interna-
tional funding agencies, espe-
cially the World Bank, r e c o-
gnize that higher education and
research can no longer be dis-
missed as unnecessary “ l u x u-
ries.”
But universities now have
to come up with “productive”
results. Applied research now
tops the list of budget priorities
and research projects are judged on their “ m a r k e t
value.” Basic research and the humanities have
been sidelined.Universities, traditionally held up
as “ m o d e l s,”have become commercially-oriented.
Makerere University, in Uganda, and others raise
money by selling services. It is true that academics
are paid more in such institutions, their labs have
new equipment and their foreign benefactors
sometimes protect them from local political pres-
sures. But they end up serving the funding agen-
cies—tailoring their research to these agencies’
objectives and even becoming consultants for their
development projects. Sometimes the academics
are just left to implement the projects and are
quickly dropped if they try
to have a say in how they
should be conducted. Th i s
happened to a group of
Sudanese economists after
they protested about an
International Labour Orga-
nization project.
The market has yet to
provide adequate solutions
to Africa’s problems. Tan-
zanian jurist Issa Shivji
neatly summed up the
plight of African intellec-
tuals a few years ago: “ Yo u
know what you can expect from the state and
how to resist,” he said. “But you don’t know
what the market has in store for you. The state
lets you know that it is out to hang you, so you
can put up a fight. The market gives you a long
rope to hang yourself.” ■

Universities have been
sacrificed over
the past
twenty years
on the altar
of structural
adjustment programmes
