M
ust you live with the body you are born
with or can you remake it? We have
long been confronting this question.
Whether it be the removal of body parts
in religious practices (such as
c i r c u m c i s i o n ) , the surgeon’s ability to sculpt a chin or the
promise of geneticists to alter and improve bodies of the
f u t u r e.
This is the promise of innate malleability that we
increasingly take as a given in our world, whether in
Ve n e z u e l a , South Africa or Hollywood.And nowhere
is this desire for transformation more clearly seen
than in aesthetic surgery.
In the west and beyond,we believe that we have
the right not only to remake our bodies, but to control
the process. Indeed the patients of aesthetic surgery are
the ideal patients of modern medical systems.They are
exemplars of autonomy, who question their doctors to
explore their treatment options. Breast implants, f a c e -
lifts and tummy tucks were not pushed upon people by
the medical profession or industry. Virtually every
procedure in cosmetic surgery has been in response to
popular demand.
This desire for individual transformation is a
distinctly western notion. It stems back to the
Enlightenment ideology (beginning in the 17t h
century) that each individual could remake him or
herself in the pursuit of happiness. I n d e e d , it is
remarkable how often aesthetic surgeons cite
“ h a p p i n e s s ” as the goal of their procedures.They have
a utilitarian notion like that espoused by John Stuart
Mill (1806-73): the active citizen, working for progress,
is a happy one.
This idea took on biological dimensions once
surgeons were able to reduce their patients’ pain and
risk of infection. The anesthesia and antisepsis
originally developed by military doctors to heal battle
wounds were quickly picked up by surgeons seeking
to correct their patients’ birth defects and then fulfill
their desires. “ H a p p i n e s s ” in aesthetic surgery lay
i n the individual’s autonomy to transform him- or
herself.
I n d e e d , by the late 19th century, the Enlightenment
notion of self-improvement had moved from the
b a t t l e field of liberalism to the laboratories and surgical
t h e a t r e s.The destabilization experienced and repressed
during the American and French revolutions re-
emerged in a sea change in imagining who we are and
what our bodies are. The political “unhappiness” of
class and poverty, which led to the storming of the
B a s t i l l e, was experienced as “ u n h a p p i n e s s ”within the
body. Before, it was revolutionary change that would
cure the body;later, it was the cure of the individual.
The hygiene of the body thus became the hygiene
of the spirit and that of the state. By removing
“ugliness,” the aesthetic surgeon provided a type of
surgical eugenics,a means of improving the individual
and ultimately the state. Aesthetic surgery could
transform the body into one that fulfilled the
expectations of a new society and could change with
them.
“Vanishing” into society
So by the turn of the 20thcentury, it was possible
to start altering the body in order to become a “real”
citizen in a foreign or hostile land.In the United States,
for example, light-skinned African-Americans had
their lips thinned and their noses rebuilt so that they
could cross the colour line.And if they were too dark,
they had their skin lightened. In New Yo r k , I r i s h
immigrants had their “pug noses” transformed into
“English noses” and their ears pinned back so that
this sign of their “degenerate Irish nature” vanished
and they could “pass”as American.
In Berlin there was Jacques Joseph (1865-1934), a
highly acculturated young German Jewish surgeon.
Born Jakob Joseph, he altered his too Jewish name
while studying medicine at university, where he joined
a dueling fraternity and bore the scars with pride. For
some Jews like Jo s e p h , a dueling scar marked the
socially healthy individual in German society.But at the
very close of the 19t h c e n t u r y, after Joseph left
u n i v e r s i t y, Jewish men were excluded from the
Christian dueling fraternities: they were considered
different and thus dishonourable. For a Jew to bear a
facial scar was to hide his sickly essence from the
m a i n s t r e a m .So Joseph enabled his Jewish compatriots
to “ v a n i s h ” in society. He developed the first procedure
of reducing the size and shape of the “Jewish”nose.
SANDER L. GILMAN
PROFESSOR IN HUMAN BIOLOGY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGOAND AUTHOR
OR EDITOR OF OVER 50 BOOKS INCLUDING, MAKING THE BODY BEAUTIFUL: A
CULTURAL HISTORY OF AESTHETIC SURGERY (PRINCETON, 1999)



I l l u s i o n s, scalpels and
s t e re o t y p e s
By sculpting a chin or enlarging a breast, aesthetic surgeons appear
to be operating on the body. But we know better: they are reshaping
our fantasies of ourselves 

P re c u rsor Jacques Joseph.

In January 1898, a 28-year-old man came to Jo s e p h ,
complaining that “his nose was the source of
considerable annoyance.Wherever he went,e v e r y b o d y
stared at him...”Joseph took the young man’s case and
proceeded to perform his first reduction rhinoplasty,
cutting through the skin of the nose to reduce its size
and alter its shape by chipping away the bone and
removing the cartilage. On May 11,1898 he reported
on this operation before the Berlin Medical Society.H e
provided a detailed “ s c i e n t i fic ” rationale for performing
a medical procedure on an otherwise completely
healthy individual: “ The depressed attitude of the
patient subsided completely. He is happy to move
around unnoticed.” The patient was cured of the
“disease”of “nostrility.”Yet Joseph was not satisfied.
T h e
procedure left small scars that revealed the
inauthencity of the body.
On April 19, 1904 Joseph undertook another
procedure entirely within the nose.No scars remained
to mark the individual. Joseph had learned that only
(in)visibility left his patients “happy.” They “passed”
into German society. They desired to forget their
b o d i e s, to become one with those they imagined had no
worries about the acceptability of their features.
This is the essence of “ p a s s i n g ” and it sets the
model for a radical rethinking of how we imagine our
b o d i e s. It is the model of malleability that we find in late
19thcentury Meiji Japan when it opened to the west.
German physicians started modern medical schools
and the Japanese began to remake themselves to
approximate western images of beauty. The eyelids
became double and the nose larger.They were passing
into the world of the modern.
Promise or curse?
By the 1970s in the United States, Vi e t n a m e s e
Americans were undergoing the same sets of operations.
N o w, they are “ p a s s i n g ” into a modern, global world of
pan-Asian appearance. They give their 16-year- o l d
daughters the gift of aesthetic surgery just as the
American Jews on Long Island had done in the 1950s.
Today Japanese girls are having breast implants at the
age of 13—before their bodies have fully developed—
to “pass”into the teen-world of global pop-stars.
We “pass” to regain control of ourselves and to
efface that which is seen (we believe) as different.
Aesthetic surgery allows relief from imagining oneself
as different. The happiness of the patient lies in
achieving his or her fantasy of being in control, r a t h e r
than in the control of the observer on the street (who
classifies people according to their physical
a p p e a r a n c e ) . The decision to remake oneself is not
vain,nor is it morally wrong. Our claim of autonomy
can and does make people happy.
This is an illusionary but necessary claim of
happiness.The fantasy of “passing,” unlike the fantasy
of controlling the world, focuses on a single, l i m i t e d
aspect—a nose too large, hair too sparse, a breast too
small.Changing that has symbolic significance for the
individual—for the body that we change is symbolic, n o t
real. It may seem that surgeons are operating on the
material of the body, but they (and we) know better: t h e y
are reshaping our fantasies of ourselves.The new nose
may resolve those fantasies or may lead us to demand
even more proof of our control over our bodies. But the
vocabulary of images is always shifting.We shall remake
o u r s e l v e s. Into what remains to be seen. Such is the
promise and the curse of the modern world. ■
“The depressed attitude of the patient subsided
completely,” reported the surgeon,
following an operation to reduce the size
of the man’s nose in the early 1900s.
