PHOTOS BY DAVID SAUVEUR, TEXT BY ANDRÉ CHOURAQUI
DAVID SAUVEURIS A FRENCH PHOTOGRAPHER; ANDRÉ CHOURAQUI HASTRANSLATEDTHE BIBLE ANDWRITTEN SEVERAL BOOKS.
HIS LATESTWORKS INCLUDE JÉRUSALEM, VILLE SANCTUAIRE (EDITIONS DU ROCHER 1997) AND LE FEUDE L'ALLIANCE (BAYARD PRESSE 2001).



Jerusalem Utopia
The Church of the Holy Sepulchre, rebuilt in the 11th century when Jerusalem was seized during the crusades.

“Above all Jerusalem, whose name awakens so many mysteries and startles the imagination: it seems
that everything must be extraordinary in this extraordinary city.”
Chateaubriand, Itinéraire de Paris à Jérusalem (1811)
Je r u s a l e m , the ancient capital of Ju d e a , has been resuscitated
today as a microcosm of the entire world, in all its contrasts and
most glaring contradictions. Stand at an intersection in the city,
and you’ll see pass by a collection of the world’s most diverse
people, hailing from every country and century.
Since 1950 I have watched these crowds—crowds which no-
one could have imagined or planned. The government of Israel
opened the gates of Jerusalem to all Jews who wanted to move
The tunnel beneath the Wailing Wall,sole remant of the temple destroyed in 70 A.D. by the Romans.
IN MEMORY OF RENÉ CASSIN,
THEMAIN DRAFTER OFTHE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
t h e r e. They have flowed in since from around the world,
becoming neighbours in the city of Christ with Ja p a n e s e
M a k u y a s1,members of 45 different Christian denominations and
Muslims representing all the rites and geographic origins of
Islam.
The merchants of the Old City hawk their products to
passers-by and, in honour of trading tradition,barter over prices.
Depending on the season,market stalls overflow with oranges,

An Orthodox Christian in the Holy Sepulchre.



The conflict,which the United Nations had hoped to settle,
has continued to this day through war between the state of
Israel and the Palestinian people’s representatives.The creation
of a Palestinian state would help to end the violence that still
drenches the city of peace in blood.The union of two states,o n e
Israeli,the other Palestinian,in a single confederation open to
other countries in the Middle East, could bring peace and
progress to all in the future.2
No one,h o w e v e r, can speak of Jerusalem without mentioning
its prophets, the tragedies of its history, the 2,000-year-old exile
of its people and their homecoming after the Shoah. Then,the
foundation of the state of Israel and its tragic consequences
for the Muslim population, the Arabs’ refusal to create a
Palestinian state, the resulting inextricable conflict and the
consecutive stalemate, made worse by a smouldering war that
dares not speak its name.
No war can settle the conflict between two nationalisms
and the three religions that share blood-soaked Jerusalem.Let
us recognize that, and proclaim that this city is the historic
capital of the three religions which have their roots there. Let us
unite the people who live in the city by dividing their
responsibilities:the holy sites are already administered by the
religions laying claim to them.
Let us bring the Hebrew Bible, the Greek New Testament
and the Arab Koran back to what they originally stood for:
peace and reconciliation. Let Jerusalem at last become the
model capital for universal peace, as the prophets of the three
religions stemming from Abraham had always dreamt.
Jerusalem Utopia
Amongst the remains of the Herodian quarter ( first century B.C.).
g r a p e s,dates and all the other fruits and vegetables that grow in
the city’s many orchards and gardens.
S p i c e s, i n c e n s e, c a k e s, pitta bread and sweets proliferate
alongside religious trinkets and local crafts, made from wood and
metal according to age-old techniques in little workshops nestled
in the Old City’s narrow streets. It is here that tens of thousands
of pilgrims from every corner of Christendom flock to gaze on
Christ’s tomb.
Alongside Judaism and Christianity, another religion born
from the Bible’s fertile soil takes special interest in the city, for
Jerusalem is also the place where the Prophet Muhammad
ascended to A l l a h ’s heaven to meet A b r a h a m , Moses and Je s u s.
All of Jerusalem—all 30 centuries of fervent history—are
concentrated in 90 hectares enclosed by ramparts.
The city has roots in the Hebrew Bible (or the Book of the
C o v e n a n t ) , the New Testament (or Book of the New Covenant)
and the Koran (or Book of the Realization of all the Covenants
since A b r a h a m ) . A revived Jerusalem became the land of
Israel’s homecoming after the Balfour Declaration (1917) and
the United Nations resolutions on November 29,1947, which
recommended the creation on territory then under a British
mandate of two states—one Israeli, one Palestinian—around
Je r u s a l e m , placed under UN control.That homecoming was to
reconcile all of A b r a h a m ’s children—Je w s, Christians and
Muslims—and enable them to achieve together their common
ideal:the universal covenant of humanity.
Let Jerusalem at last 
become the model capital 
for universal peace

Is it utopian to believe that in the New Israel and its reborn
c a p i t a l , M u s l i m s, Christians and Jews can dwell together in
peace? If you think so, know that the future of world peace
depends on achievement of this utopia.And that is probably why
the psalms attributed to King David already exhorted:
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem! (Psalm 122.6 ).
Why especially Jerusalem? Because this city is where
c u l t u r e s, religions and people of all ages and languages meet.Ye s,
let us pray for the peace of Je r u s a l e m , a peace that could
foreshadow that of the world’s other cultures, w h e n , q u i t e
simply, all men and women will recognize each other as their
brothers and sisters. ■
1. A group of Japanese Christians who since WWII have sought
closer ties with traditional Christianity, the “people of the
Bible”and Judaism.
2. André Chouraqui:Lettre à un ami arabe, J.-C.L a t t è s, 1 9 9 4 ,a n d
Jérusalem revisitée, Ed.du Rocher, 1995.
Stalls selling to tourists and pilgrims in the Old City’s Christian Quarter.

Jerusalem Utopia
Near Damascus Gate, the northern entry to the Old City, where traces remain of the Ottomans, Romans,Byzantines and the crusades.
This city is where cultures, 
religions and people of all ages 
and languages meet.

Sugar and honey: pastries in Arab Jerusalem.
