“Ja p a n ’s smooth social fabric is just an illusion,”says Nadamoto Masahisa,
who teaches modern history at Kyoto University. “It’s still based on
invisible castes and as Burakumin, we’re at the bottom of the ladder.”
Alongside his teaching,Masahisa is fighting to defend the Burakumin (or Eta-
Hinin, which can be translated as “polluted or dirty non-persons”) whom
society continues to shun.
The Buraku,as they are also known,were seen until the second half of the
19th century as an “untouchable”minority. Numbering over two million in
a country of 126 million people, they live in some 5,000 ghettos, which are
the direct result of an official outcast status that was abolished in 1871 at
the start of the Meiji era,when the country began industrializing at a rapid
pace.
The word Burakumin referred then to those who laboured mainly in
s l a u g h t e r h o u s e s, t a n n e r i e s, k n a c ke r ’s yards and morgues—people who
w o r ked with bodies, carcasses and blood, occupations that are unclean
according to Japan’s ancient Shinto religion.
All official discrimination against the Buraku has long disappeared. Th e
authorities point to the fact that members of this invisible caste today have
the same legal rights as all other Ja p a n e s e.They have the same physical traits,
speak the same language and share the same religion.
But written laws are not always the same as what goes on in people’s
minds. Masahisa and other militants are campaigning against unofficial
discrimination toward the Burakumin by property-owners, estate agents and
company offic i a l s. “A lot of Japanese think twice before renting to a
B u r a k u m i n ,” he says.“If a person is identified as one or says he is, e v e r y t h i n g
becomes harder. If you rent to a Buraku,people say you’ll have bad luck.”
In modern Ja p a n , the Burakumin are also socially marginalized. “In the
1960s and 1970s, they provided most of the workers in construction and
i n d u s t r y,” says a lawyer who is fighting against the wage discrimination long
practised in large companies against the Burakumin.“ Today they’re the fir s t
victims of the economic crisis.”
Their concentration in areas such as Osaka and the old imperial capital of
Kyoto makes them easier to spot, which only encour-
ages many to deny their social origins. To take one example, an influential
politician from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, Hiromu Nonaka, has
always denied his connection with the Burakumin.
Even worse, some bourgeois Japanese families make illegal checks on the
ancestors of their children’s future spouses “to avoid polluting the family,”
as they put it.They hire special genealogical agencies to comb through the
old koseki (family registers) at the prefectures, often with the tacit approva l
of local officials. ■
Richard Werly, French journalist based in Japan



THE BURAKUMIN, JA PAN’S INVISIBLE OUTCASTS
