W H Y  R A C I S M ?
IVAN BRISCOE
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Fo r t ress Euro p e
bids you welcome
Europe’s governments are struggling to stem the flow of migrants from
poor countries while opening the gates wide for the best of the world’s
workers. Is their policy tenable?
2 . THE EXCLUDED
W
hen Huzefa Hundekari decided it was
time for a change of scene, the doors
of Western Europe swung invitingly
o p e n . Helped by some very co-
operative immigration officials and
the promise of a hefty salary, this 29-year-old Indian
manager in a multinational IT firm glided into his new
posting in Fr a n k f u r t .“ They have a defined process laid
o u t . They require a set of papers, then you get your
green card. It does not take more than 15 to 20 days.”
From the perspective of a vast squat in central Paris,
H u n d e k a r i ’s experiences seem closer to a work of
fic t i o n . Ten years ago, Mamadou Tr a o r e, now aged 35,
fled for a new life.Coming from Mali,he crossed several
thousand kilometres of desert,ventured through A l g e r i a
just as civil war was beginning, crossed the
Mediterranean in a perilous dinghy, and arrived in Paris
three months later, penniless and not knowing a soul.
Unfortunately for Tr a o r e, French immigration
o f ficials rarely give visas for effort. His applications for
legal residency have been refused three times. Now he
lives frugally with 350 others, all in similar straits.“A t
any time we could be arrested or deported.You always
have to prepare for the worst.”
Wanted:
“the best brains”
To judge from these rival experiences, no single
account can now be given of immigration to Europe.
Whereas Hundekari has profited from a desperate
effort by the German government to reinforce the
new economy, Traore and an estimated four million
other illegal migrants in the European Union live
hand-to-mouth,shunned by governments and by the
citizens of their host countries.
Open to the skilled, restricted for the poor and
even the persecuted, Western Europe is conceiving a
new model of welcome. “ We do not consider
immigration to be just a burden any more, but an
e n r i c h m e n t ,”declared Rita Süssmuth, head of an offic i a l
German commission that has called for up to
2 0 0 , 0 0 0 visas to be handed out each year, preferably to
the “best brains.” For the first time in 30 years,
governments are championing the economic utility of
n o n - E u r o p e a n s. But the question remains: if migrants
are gauged on their use, then what becomes of their
s t a t u s ?
“Europe has not escaped from what seems to be
the destiny of all areas experiencing rapid growth:
the need to bring in labour supplies from outside,”
wrote the American sociologist Saskia Sassen in her
b o o k , Guests and Aliens (New Press, 2 0 0 0 ) . Indeed the
past 200 years of European history have been rich in
mass movement and its usual companion, x e n o p h o b i c
hatred: Poles, Slavs and Jews moved West in number
in the 19th century,earning a wary reception from host
countries that showed much less reluctance in peopling
colonies and dispatching 50 million migrants across the
Atlantic prior to 1914.Following the devastating racial
politics of the next three decades, Europe resumed its
normal labour-absorbing course, this time recruiting
workers from A s i a , Africa and the Middle East in
unprecedented quantities—around 70 million,
including those who returned to their countries of
origin—for the job of postwar reconstruction.
The downturn of the 1970s put a swift end to all
t h a t . Workers were no longer free to come, o n l y
relatives of those already settled and asylum-seekers.
Unemployment and prejudice in turn nurtured a
virulent right-wing backlash in Fr a n c e, Germany and
B r i t a i n , the main countries at risk of being “ s w a m p e d .”
For today’s political elite, the lessons of those
decades are still fresh. Buoyant economic performance
may well have blunted the extremists’ appeal, b u t
In Calais (Fra n c e ) , checking trucks for migrants being smuggled into Euro p e.

containment of numbers remains a critical part of
immigration policy. For EU ministers, this means
whittling down the 390,000 asylum applications made
last year and halting the unregistered human cargo—
if only, as they claim, to protect immigrants’ well-
being.
“ Those who co-operate on this issue at the
European level are from interior and justice
m i n i s t r i e s,”explains Virginie Guiraudon,an expert in
migration policy from the University of Lille. “ Fo r
t h e m , immigration policy means immigration control.
As long as these people control the agenda, t h e r e ’s no
reason to see any change in the repressive policy,
meaning most decisions are about illegal migration,
human smuggling, barrier sanctions or restricting
asylum.”
Yet despite the ministers’ best efforts, the flow of
people does not seem to have relented. The world
counts  an estimated 21 million refugees, m o s t l y
displaced by war or political breakdown.Only a tiny
proportion are now in Europe, but the spread of
global media,means of transport and sharply widening
inequality between the developing world and
Europe—historically the most fundamental cause of
mass migration—promises to deliver many more
people like Traore to the shores of affluence.
The danger of opening the doors to this exodus,
politicians maintain, lies in Europe’s perennial
spectre—the draconian right.Vlaams Bok is one such
political force.Founded in 1977 as a Flemish nationalist
p a r t y, its policies towards Belgium’s migrant
population call for total closure of borders, i m m e d i a t e
deportation of all illegal migrants, summary expulsion
of any foreigner who has turned to crime.“ I m m i g r a n t s
d o n ’t adapt,” declares Philippe Van Der Sande,
spokesman for the party in A n t w e r p, where it won 33
percent of the vote in 1999 elections. “ They don’t
want to learn the language.They are not interested in
our culture but just winning easy money.”
The far right’s new clothes
Opinions like these can be heard in all European
c o u n t r i e s, and have even risen to government rank in
Au s t r i a . Yet in place of the boisterous nationalism
that characterized the previous generation of far-
right parties, groups like Vlaams Bok take a defensive
p o s t u r e : the party is not racist,Van Der Sande says, b u t
only wishes to preserve what Flemish society has
laboured to achieve.“ We Europeans are a minority in
the world, and we are considered to have a good
welfare system. If we give the impression that
everyone is welcome here, millions of people will
want to come.”
For modern Europe’s far right—and for sizeable
minorities of the population in Fr a n c e, B e l g i u m ,
Germany and Scandinavia according to surveys—the
immigrant may be avaricious, bedridden,criminal or
simply a job-stealer, s e l fishly milking the society that
happens to be richer. As critics point out, the far-
r i g h t ’s rhetoric on immigration now differs from that
An assembly in the teeming quarters of a hostel for immigrant workers on the outskirts of Paris.

of governments only by a matter of degree.
The irony is that the debate has moved back into
the economists’ camp:far from crippling a high quality
of welfare, immigrants are now touted as possibly the
way to preserve living standards in an ageing Europe.
The UN Population Division claims that 13.5 million
new migrants are needed each year to keep Europe’s
ratio of workers and pensioners steady.
Until now, certain businesses have clamoured for
unimpeded access to the global labour market.
Shortages in new technological industries have already
toppled Germany’s 30-year freeze on foreign labour.
The rest of Europe is chasing alongside, while bumped-
up quotas for the exceptionally computer-gifted have
been brandished by Australia, Japan and the United
S t a t e s.Recession in Silicon Va l l e y,h o w e v e r, may have
slammed one door shut: 400,000 foreigners are believed
to be at risk of losing their jobs. Each sacked worker
will have 10 days to leave the country.
Closed borders,
an invitation to slavery 
Yet it is not only high skills that Europe has been
searching. As expectations of comfortable desk-jobs
have become the norm,workers to fill more gruelling
vacancies are also lacking. And it is here that the
current immigration policy shows its deepest
contradictions. Several countries now run quotas for
these jobs:Italy plans 83,000 visas this year for farm
labourers while Spain indulges migrant house-cleaners.
But there are few illusions as to where the bulk of
this cheap labour is going to come from. “ I n
construction,packaging and agriculture it’s the same
all over Europe. Nobody wants to pick up asparagus
w h o ’s not an illegal migrant any more,” o b s e r v e s
Guiraudon.
C h e a p, utterly unprotected by the law and willing
to work in the most menial conditions, illegal migrants
are some employers’ ideal candidates.Though Tr a o r e
has been refused his visa three times, never have the
French authorities sought to stop him from working,
n o r,he insists, from paying social security contributions
for services he was never eligible to use.
“Closing the frontiers serves above all else to
make slaves,” argues Jean-Pierre Alaux,an official at
G I S T I , a Paris-based NGO that helps immigrants.
“People are going to arrive all the same:all the interior
ministers know it,and all the bosses know it.”
The critical question for Europe’s governments
and peoples is whether this opening of borders, sotto
v o c e and driven by purely economic criteria, is the best
way to create well-integrated societies.Riots in several
northern English cities have proved in the last few
months that even communities dating from the post-
war migrant influx can continue in utter segregation.
For many pro-migrant activists, the danger is that the
new economic opening will simply reinforce a deep-
seated racism.“In some part of our collective cultural
mentality in the We s t ,w e ’ve kept a certain number of
values which are the same as from the time of slavery,”
argues A l a u x . “ For us, the South is a sort of raw
material.”
A chilling demonstration of these prejudices came
last year, when the murder of a native woman by a
mentally disturbed Moroccan labourer triggered anti-
migrant riots in the Spanish town of El Ejido. Fo r
y e a r s, workers have come from North Africa to farms
that have brought an unprecedented wealth to this
desert region. Necessary or not, these illegal labourers
live apart,often in shacks without water and electricity,
paid pitifully little and despised by the local
agricultural elite.“ Th e r e ’s an expression local people
u s e : they say let [the migrants] cross the straits, take a
w a s h , so long as they throw away the water and
become Spanish,” reports Antonio Puertas, p r e s i d e n t
of the local NGO Almeria Acoge.
“How do you get accepted here? Even if you could,
do you really want to drop your sense of self, whiten
your skin and become a Christian?”wonders Traore.
Though Europe has managed to create a few
urban centres of multi-racial harmony, c u l t u r a l
discrimination and economic segregation, shown at its
extreme in El Ejido, have proved much harder to
o v e r c o m e. In closing borders, referring all justific a t i o n
for immigration back to economics, establishing quotas
and limiting rights to permanent settlement—even
for the highly skilled—governments might appear to
be accentuating the view that foreigners are second-
class citizens and potential parasites. As Guiraudon
points out, one country that has heavily depended
on quotas of short-term foreign labour is Switzerland,
also one of the last countries to pass a law on racial
integration.
But there are many other imponderables.Will the
pension crisis be as severe as the UN expects? Could
an enlarged Europe with freedom of movement for a
largely white population harden prejudices against
non-EU migrants or assuage them? Might recession
trigger a violent anti-migrant movement that even
reaches the professional echelons (as occurred during
