How close is Artificial Intelligence to creating
something that resembles a human?
There are broadly two levels of A r t i fic i a l
Intelligence (AI).The narrow level is about
getting non-biological systems to perform activities
that require human intelligence when we perform
t h e m .Strong AI is about applying the full range,d e p t h
and subtlety of human intelligence in a machine.
We have many examples of narrow AI today.
Machines can diagnose blood cells, guide cruise
missiles and play games likes chess better than any
h u m a n .They can read books and they can understand
human speech. In comparison to humans, t h e i r
memories are more accurate, they are faster and they
can share their knowledge instantly by quick
downloading.
There are two basic requirements for moving onto
the next stage. One is just the brute force hardware
capacity. Already, we are working on certain circuit
technologies that will be a million times more powerful
than the human brain, at least in terms of raw capacity.
But the more important issue is the software of
i n t e l l i g e n c e. In this regard, the most compelling project
underway is one to reverse engineer the human brain,
possibly by using billions of tiny high-resolution
scanners or nanobots that can travel through
capillaries and scan the brain from inside.
My feeling is that by 2030,w e ’ll be able to recreate
how several hundred regions of the human brain
work in non-biological mediums.
Would that non-biological medium then be equivalent
to a human?
We already have technology called a neuron
transistor—an electronic circuit that can communicate
wirelessly in two directions with biological neurons.We
also have examples of intelligent machines placed in
human brains via neural implants. A treatment for
P a r k i n s o n ’s Disease, pioneered in France by Dr A l i m -
Louis Benabid replaces the biological cells destroyed
in the first seven or eight years of the disease. The
doctor demonstrated this by controlling the device
from outside: when turned off, the patients remained
in an advanced stage of Parkinson’s—they were rigid
like statues. He flicked a switch, and it was as if they
had suddenly come alive.
By 2030, we will be able to send billions of
nanobots inside the human brain to communicate
wirelessly with billions of different points in the brain.
They will give us the ability to combine our biological
intelligence with non-biological intelligence.
Ultimately you will have entities that are completely
non-biological,with copies of human brains derived
from reverse engineering,and you will have biological
humans that have billions or trillions of nanobots in
their brains augmenting their intelligence or enabling
them to exist in virtual reality. So we will no longer be
able to say humans on the left, machines on the right.
One of your most startling ideas is that of downloading
the brain of an individual onto a computer system. Is this
truly possible?
I discussed in my book some thought experiments
of what that would be like. Is that the same person,f o r
example? One simple thought experiment argues that
it’s not,that if you scan my brain while I’m sleeping
and then reinstate it in a non-biological medium, I
would not even necessarily know about it. I ’d wake up,
feeling nothing was different.Someone would come
up to me and say:‘Good news,R a y,we don’t need your
old brain any more.’ I would probably not accept that
perspective. If you spoke to the new Ray, he would
have a memory of having been me, but at that point he
is a different person.
There’s also the issue: is he a person at all? Is he
conscious, or is he just acting that way? But the core
essence of consciousness is ultimately not penetrable
by scientific examination.We have a shared assumption
about humans that they are conscious,but that shared
consensus breaks down if you go outside humans. I ’ m
really making a political prediction that humans will
accept non-biological entities as conscious because
they’ll be so convincing in their behaviour.
What would be the benefits of being transferred onto
a non-biological medium?
A lot of profound scenarios emerge, one of which
is full immersion in virtual reality.These virtual reality
environments will incorporate all of the senses,and will
also be able to augment human intelligence. R i g h t
INTERVIEW BY IVAN BRISCOE
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
G o o d b y e b i o l o g y,
h e l l o s o f t wa r e
Do we really need our flesh and blood? Ray Kurzweil, guru of Artificial
Intelligence, believes that the conscious machine is only decades away—
so get ready to download

now we’re restricted to a mere hundred trillion neuron
connections per second, millions of which are needed
to operate one chunk of knowledge. We’ll be able to
vastly expand the human brain—think faster, think
b i g g e r, more complex thoughts, have more knowledge
and download knowledge.
But many neurological theories argue that consciousness
is in fact very much mixed up with emotions, with a
sense of being in the body and having objects act upon
the body.
Intelligence is the ability to solve problems using
finite resources, including time.And the problems we
solve have much to do with our body—protecting it,
feeding it, clothing it, providing for its needs and
d e s i r e s.A lot of our thinking has to do with our bodies:
a disembodied human intelligence would quickly
become depressed.
But as virtual reality becomes more and more
c o m p e l l i n g, human civilization will be spending more
of its time in it.By 2030 or 2040,these virtual reality
environments will be extremely competitive with real
ones through the ability to meet with people regardless
of physical proximity and emulation of earthly and
imaginary environments.These non-biological entities
will be able to have human-like bodies in virtual
r e a l i t i e s. A l s o, through nanotechnology1, t h e y ’ll be
able have human-like bodies in real reality.
What is driving this technology?
Ultimately we as a species have adopted
e v o l u t i o n ’s goals, and they are in my mind virtual
o n e s. If you look dispassionately at biological
evolution, it has created entities that are more and
more intelligent,creative, beautiful,more capable of
higher emotions like love. God is a term that has been
used to denote infinite levels of these qualities.What
the new paradigm signifies is the end of biological
humanity as the cutting edge of evolution.I see what
we have been talking about as the next step in
evolution through humanity merging with its
technology and continuing its exponential growth in
intellectual,creative powers. ■
1. Nanotechnology is the construction of materials or
circuits on the basis of complex, s e l f - r e p l i c a t i n g
chemical molecules.
