FABRICE LOSEGO, WITH ADDITIONAL REPORTING BY THE UNESCO COURIER
FREELANCE JOURNALIST



With Bolivar we go
Taking aim at corruption and vested interests, Venezuela’s government has launched
a far-reaching education reform. Some see Cuba at the doorstep, while others applaud
the will to shore up an ailing system
he Venezuelan revolution is on the march,
bearing education as its torch. S i n c e
sweeping to power as president in Fe b-
ruary 1999, Hugo Chavez, a former lieu-
tenant-colonel who led a foiled coup seven
years earlier, has launched an education
reform unprecedented in the country’s
200-year history.
Why education? “ I t ’s probably the
most important battlefield in the process of
c h a n g e,” said education minister Hector
Navarro recently. “ You can reform the
e c o n o m y,but for change to be irreversible,
you first have to change the citizen.”
Throughout his campaign, Chavez tapped
into public disaffection with the political
system that has been dominated by the
same two parties for 40 years. After being
voted in, a new constitution was drafted.
The country was renamed Bolivarian
Republic of Ve n e z u e l a , in homage to
Simon Bolivar, the 19th-century father of
Venezuelan independence and one of
C h a v e z ’s foremost intellectual mentors.
Then the government launched a radical
shake-up of the education system, c l a i m i n g
it was plagued by corrupt practices and
growing inequity. One of its prime targets
is an “ o l i g a r c h y ” made up of privileged
classes and the Church, whom the presi-
dent accuses of robbing the poor of an
education.
There’s reason for concern. The mar-
ginalized formed the bedrock of Chavez’s
electoral base, and they’re no minority.
Twenty years ago,Venezuela boasted some
of the highest quality of life indicators in
Latin America.Today, it is estimated that
two-thirds (14.6 million) of the population
lives below the poverty line, while a further
7.5 million people (31percent) are classifie d
as indigent.1
Education has suffered from the crisis.
Spending fell from 7.4 percent of GDP in
1983 to 3.8 percent in 1998. The primary
school completion rate stands at 84 per-
cent,lagging behind the 94 percent Latin
American average. “In the last 20 years,

A mural depicting Cuban hero Jose Marti and Venezuela’s Simon Bolivar graces a newly opened school aimed at poor children.

Venezuela has gone through a transition
from an ’education of castes to an educa-
tion of masses,’ considerably increasing
coverage and widening opportunities,”
states an evaluation prepared for
UNESCO. It notes, however, that “there
has been a deterioration in indicators like
repetition and dropout as well as in the
quality and pertinence of the cur-
riculum…Private education has been pro-
moted as the ’channel of excellence.’ ”
According to Abraham Zalzaman,one of
the report’s authors,“the whole education
system is in need of deep change. Q u a l i t a-
tively, it’s very weak.”
Patriotic revival
Against this backdrop, Chavez abol-
ished registration fees in public schools,
sent the armed forces into local commu-
nities to repair and build schools and hos-
p i t a l s, and launched a pilot programme
aimed at underprivileged children.
According to conservative estimates, the
initiatives have already allowed 350,000
children to enroll (roughly 4.2 million chil-
dren make up the basic school popula-
tion),a figure the president has vowed to
boost by the end of the year. During a visit
to Venezuela in January 2001, U N E S C O ’s
D i r e c t o r-General Koichiro Matsuura com-
mended Venezuela’ “serious efforts” t o
promote basic education, reflected in an
increase in education spending to 6 percent
of GDP,well above the 3.9 percent average
in developing countries.
So far, out of the 20,000 primary and
secondary schools in the country, n e a r l y
2,000 have been renamed Bolivarian.Th e i r
strong points: they offer eight hours of
classes per day (most schools only go half
d a y s ) , free meals, medical care and sports.
Patriotic symbols have acquired cult status
in many of them. Classrooms have their
“Bolivarian corners,” where the flag, the
national anthem and a portrait of the inde-
pendence leader are displayed.The flag is
raised every morning and children are
briefed in the classroom on  “Bolivarian
principles,” as mandated by the new Con-
stitution.
These pilot schools give a taste of a
profound attempt to reform the system,
framed in the National Education Project.
One of project’s chief architects is Carlos
L a n z , a sociologist and former guerrilla
who spent eight years in prison for taking
part in the kidnapping of an A m e r i c a n
businessman in the 1970s. Lanz does not
shrug off his subversive past, but affirms
that “there is no relationship between the
armed struggle of those times and the pro-
posals for educational reform put forward
by the current government.”
The project’s ideological slant, h o w-
e v e r, is fairly blunt.The “new revolutionary
education model”views globalization as a
“colonialist threat … with serious impli-
cations for collective memory and national
i d e n t i t y.”The project laments that television
and computers have “imposed values”in a
“subtle form of domination and coloniza-
t i o n .”To confront this onslaught, the project
advocates a school that will be “a space of
cultural resistance and counter- h e g e m o n y,
a place to reconquer the country’s heritage
and Indo-Afro-American roots.”A c c o r d i n g
to Carlos Casanova, a philosophy professor
from Simon Bolivar University in Caracas,
this turn represents “a loss of the western
structure in Venezuelan society, and a nega-
tion of its Hispanic past.”
With the aim of making the country
more efficient and “building an army of
patriotic Venezuelans,” secondary school
students are required to follow pre-military
instruction.A manual geared at 14-year-
olds warns against “irrational immigra-
t i o n ,” notably from neighbouring
Colombia. There are other bones of con-
tention.In its will to “democratize educa-
tion,” the project advocates the establish-
ment of “educational communities” t o
govern schools. These would extend the
present system, composed of parents,
teachers and the school principal, to the
community at large, from local sports clubs
to neighbourhood associations.The goal is
for “schools to contribute to the forma-
tion of a participatory culture.”
Private schools’ associations, t h e
Church and teachers’ unions have seen
red.In January 2001,some 5,000 parents
and teachers marched through the streets
of Caracas, the capital city, c h a n t i n g
“Chavez,don’t mess with my children,”
and accusing the regime of indoctrinating
youth in Cuban style. “ The new regime is
trying to ’infiltrate’ schools to get its ide-
ological message across,” says  Leonardo
Carvajal,a professor from Andres Bello
Catholic University, who also derides the
idea of educational communities. “Each
one will have its president, elected by
whoever from the neighbourhood, be it
the butcher, the carpenter or groups close
to the regime.” Carvajal spearheaded a
c o u n t e r-proposal for a new education
law that was presented to the National
A s s e m b l y. Intellectuals are railing against
attempts to rewrite history books to

Handing out free meals at a new Bolivarian school in a Caracas military camp.
“The project’s  anti-
western thesis on the
ends of education 
goes against the 
notion of transmitting
universal values.”

r e flect the president’s views. “ C h a v e z
wants to erase everything that happened
between Bolivar and himself,” s a y s
Guillermo Moron, a renowned historian
and educator.
The signature of an “integrated coop-
eration accord” between Venezuela and
Cuba in the field of education has hardly
cleared the air. In exchange for 53,000 bar-
rels of cheap oil per day, the country that
scores best in international education tests
in Latin America is committed to sup-
plying Venezuela with teacher training
consultants and other services. A team of
27 Cuban “ e x p e r t s ” was invited to con-
duct a “Bolivarian Literacy Campaign”
throughout Ve n e z u e l a , while 1,600
Venezuelan teachers have already gone
to the island to study the Cuban educa-
tional model. A foundation affiliated to
the Ministry of Education recently spon-
sored a nationwide essay contest on “Che
Guevara,Example for Youth.”
Teachers’ unions are fuming over
Decree 1011, which would create a new
echelon of senior school inspectors, a r m e d
with wide powers to recommend dis-
missals. The government argues they are
required because entrenched supervisors
turn their back on corrupt practices, w h i l e
opposition politicians are concerned the
decree will be used to fire teachers who
“resist teaching Chavez’s anti-imperialist,
anti-elitist and anti-corruption ideology.”
Modernization or
revolution?
Some longtime educational experts
insist on cutting through the rhetoric .
“ We ’re a very long way from a second
C u b a ,” says Abraham Zalzaman,p r e s i d e n t
of the Institute for Studies in Education
Technology and Training and co-author of
the UNESCO evaluation. “ We ’ve signed
accords with Cuba as we have with Europe
and the U. S. on other matters.”O p p o s i t i o n
to Decree 1011 is hardly surprising. “ I t ’s
the first time that we’re talking about cor-
r u p t i o n ,” says Zalzaman.“Private education
has become more of a business than a ser-
v i c e. . . If there was a supervision system in
place worthy of the name, a lot of schools
would be closed,”he said,referring to bribes
sometimes paid to officials to get around
stringent rules governing the opening of
new privately run schools.
Some regret that for now, the project
has not focused on the nuts and bolts of
l e a r n i n g.“ I t ’s a partisan political project,”
says Mariano Herrera,coordinator of the
Centre for Cultural and Educational Inves-
t i g a t i o n s.“Our children need to learn how
to read and write before anything else.
Also, the project’s anti-western thesis on
the ends of education goes against the
notion of transmitting universal values and
respecting other cultures.”
Carlos Lanz defends the government’s
position in the face of poverty and global-
i z a t i o n .“ Their mistake [referring to those
opposed to the project] is neutrality.They
speak like us about forming citizens, but
without recognizing the confli c t s, i n t e r e s t s
and power relationships inherent in society.
For those people, there is neither weak
nor strong,while we openly take the side of
the underprivileged, the oppressed. We
have to place ourselves in the context of
Ve n e z u e l a ’s revolution, which is about
anti-oligarchy and anti-imperialism.Edu-
cation has to reflect these traits.”
“ The discourse is very aggressive,”
concedes Zalzaman.“A lot of the proposed
changes have been poorly presented.But
t h e r e ’s nothing revolutionary about the
r e f o r m .I t ’s a push towards modernization.
For the first time in 40 years, w e ’re starting
to have a real political debate.Th e r e ’s a dis-
course that’s going to revitalize the country
and give a voice to those 84 percent who
live in poverty. Of course, the middle class
feels threatened.” ■
1 . S o u r c e : Venezuela Country Profile by
The Economist Intelligence Unit,2000.
June 2001 - The UNESCO Courier 
