no longer at ease in exile
n your last book, you recall listening
as a child to the conversations of
your relatives and family friends
who met at the piazza of your
father’s house. You only began to
understand the significance of their
discussions decades later.To d a y, a t
the age of 70,are there any ideas
from those early times that con-
tinue to rattle around in your head?
Yes—the recognition of the impor-
tance of stories.We don’t know one-tenth
of the stories knocking about.But if you
want to understand a people’s experi-
e n c e, life and society, you must turn to
their stories. I am constantly looking for
that moment when an old story suddenly
reveals a new meaning.
It’s a bitter loss not to meet the kind
of people that I encountered in my
father’s house.They were not giants—in
fact they were quite unimpressive in terms
of what they achieved, but when they are
g o n e, you realize that they were more
important than you originally thought.
At the age of 25,you began writing your first
story, Things Fall Apart, which is considered
one of the first African classics to be published
in English (1958).Legend has it that the book
was the result of what you describe as a “ l a n d-
mark rebellion,” when your fellow students
openly challenged the latent racism in Mister
J o h n s o n,written by a British author and revered
by colonial teachers. At the time, did you have
any idea where this rebellion would lead? 
Mister Jo h n s o n did not turn me into a
writer—I was born that way. But it did
open my eyes to the fact that my home
was under attack and that my home was
not merely a house or a town, but an
awakening story in which the first frag-
Chinua A c h e b e :
I
Although confined to a wheelchair far from his native Nigeria, the founding father of African
literature in English is as close to his beloved home as in student days, when revolt awoke the writer
within

A writer on a constant search for new meanings in African stories.

“Westerners see a moral message
in art as a weakness”
THE WISE MAN IN THE W O O D S
True art is universal.An old and sometimes pretentious idea until you meet—or read the
work of—Chinua Achebe. No grand theories to build a universal civilization, instead the
Nigerian offers stories steeped in Igbo philosophy, which have inspired the most diverse read-
ers. The same books that helped to sustain Nelson Mandela during his prison years are stud-
ied as classics by students around the globe. Considered the founding father of the African
novel,Achebe has attracted more scholarly papers and media articles than any other African
author. His work—including some 20 books, numerous essays and edited collections of African
short stories—has been translated into 50 languages.
The first novelist to offer an African perspective on colonialism, Achebe has turned the same crit-
ical eye to contemporary ills such as the rampant corruption of Nigeria’s rulers. In his most recent
b o o k , Home and Exile ( O x f o r d , 2 0 0 0 ) , Achebe analyzes the current state of post-colonial litera-
ture based on his personal experience. In particular, he celebrates his good fortune in being part
of a “crossroads generation.” Born in Nigeria in 1930, he recalls village elders infusing his child-
hood with traditional Igbo culture, while a modern education and the heady days of Nigeria’s
independence provided the distance to both respect and criticize his society without passing
j u d g e m e n t .
Today Achebe is faced with a painful story: a car accident in 1990 forced him into a wheelchair.
Unable to receive the medical care he needs in Nigeria,he lives with his wife in a modest house
in the woods north of New York City at Bard College—a small elite liberal arts college, where
both Achebes teach.
“During happier days,” says Achebe, “I always suspected that the virtue of difficulty is enrich-
ing.But I didn’t have any real personal experience to base this on until my accident.I remem-
ber being in the hospital and a well-meaning visitor asked,’Why you?’ And I said,’Why not?’
(A deep laugh) ’Who should it be?’”
Under the soft wisdom lies a bitter irony: the man who has beseeched African artists to stay at
home is exiled from the place closest to his heart and where he is needed most, N i g e r i a . “But the
inner life is a major source and doesn’t entirely depend on where you happen to be. You make
use of what life deals,” says A c h e b e, “which is what a lot of our stories are about.” ■



ments of my own existence began to have
coherence and meaning.
To begin with, it just seemed to me
that everyone was entitled to tell his or
her own story. Some of the first people to
embrace this notion were friends and
classmates who more or less said,“ Well if
Chinua can do it, so can I.”Then came the
ladies. Even the British writers who had
previously tried to represent us began to
step back and leave the telling to the
owners of the story.
This recognition hasn’t stopped
growing. It’s gone to the point where the
seventh edition of the Norton A n t h o l o g y
of English L i t e r a t u r e includes Things Fa l l
A p a r t as a major contribution of the 20t h
century.
Artists are now pushing to not only tell their
own story but to do so in their own language.
You must understand their frustration. Things
Fall Apart has been translated into about 50
languages but not your native Igbo.
Of course it bothers me. However, I
feel very strongly that a novel written
about the Igbo people in English is better
than no novel at all. You can never wait
for the ideal circumstances to take action.
You do what you can right away—not in
50 years or 15—because you cannot be
certain where the current situation will
lead.
For instance, a few months ago I went
home for the first time in 10 years.The real
purpose of the journey was to give a
public lecture in Igbo about the problem
of the language (the continued use of a
standard dialect imposed by colonial mis-
s i o n a r i e s ) . It was one of the most incred-
ible things I have ever done in my life.
Thousands and thousands of people in
an open stadium were dramatically
responding to my words. So the question
of Igbo language is very close to my heart
and I’m working on it all the time. T h i n g s
Fall Apart tells the world about the Igbo
people. Now let us figure out how to tell
our children and ourselves in our own
language the same story and even more.
I t ’s not a matter of choosing this language
or the other, but about accommodating
both possibilities.
Your stories revolve around the weaknesses of
your central characters.As you’ve written,“ i t ’s
not very exciting when monstrous characters
cause trouble. When an ordinary man causes
h a v o c , that is more ominous.” But We s t e r n
critics often seem very uncomfortable with this
irony. They’d rather see a hero come through.
Their criticism seems to reflect an essentialist
view of the good African or the bad.
I think the word essentialism is appro-
priate. I don’t know where this defective
way of looking at art comes from.I sus-
pect it’s more Western than A f r i c a n
because in my case—that of the Igbo—art
is inclusive. It includes ordinary people
and their lives.
We have, for instance, this Mbari cel-
ebration in which ordinary people are
secluded for a few months to work with
professional artists. Everyone and every-
thing is included in the creative process.
Whatever appears on the horizon—be it
a new religion or a missionary’s bicy c l e —
is part of this story.This is a way of domes-
ticating what is new or foreign. B y
bringing a new element into your home,
you bring it under surveillance. It’s both
about hospitality and practicality to
ensure your own safety.
The goddess—called Ani by the Igbo—
who commands the Mbari festival is not
only responsible for art and creativity but
morality as well.So there is always a fron-
tier between good and evil.This is why art
cannot be used to justify destruction or an
essentialist view of people. That doesn’t

mean that our heroes are angels—they are
human like anyone else.
H o w e v e r, Westerners see a moral
message in art as a weakness. In the We s t ,
a novel that is said to be “ p o l i t i c a l ” is not
very good. Or critics say,“despite its polit-
ical message, it is good,”which is in itself
a very political thing to say. For it means,
“the world is okay; we don’t need to drag
any extraneous or political issues into the
story.”
In searching for a metaphor to reflect post-
colonial literature, you first considered:“Until
the lions produce their own historian, the story
of the hunt will glorify only the hunter.” In the
end, you opted for Salman Rushdie’s saying:
ious forms in which we were being inte-
grated into the empire....“Writing back”
is not violent like the lion. It celebrates
debate and persuasion.
You have been revolting since your early days
against a long line of colonial literature  which
was originally used to justify the slave trade.Th e
current media trend of reporting only on the
misery of Africa stems, in your eyes, from this
same line of thinking.The latest chapter in this
“ s t o r y ” is the call to “ t a ke a hard look at
A f r i c a ”and insist that the continent’s problems
are strictly her own fault. Why this rise in
“zealotry”?
I suspect it’s the guilt of imperialism
and slavery. Slavery is probably the one
thing that the West is still most uncom-
fortable about. I suspect that the “ d i s-
c o v e r y ” of slavery in Africa today gives a
good deal of good feeling to this group of
zealots. Some people, perhaps not real-
izing what’s going on, are playing into
their trap. There is no denying the abuse
of children that can go on in poverty—
when parents, for example, send their
children to work because they are unable
to earn a bare minimum.But then some
well-meaning Westerner stumbles upon
this and cries “ S l a v e r y ! ”The downgrading
of the word “ s l a v e ” to represent any kind
of abuse or ill-treatment doesn’t help the
story about what happened for 300 years
in the Trans-Atlantic slave trade.
For every two steps forwa r d , t a ke one step
backwards—that’s the way you described the
“The empire writes back.” Why? 
The metaphor of the lion was far too
dramatic. The lion was bound to drag in
willy-nilly the question of its strength and
overpowering the enemy. But the “The
empire writes back”reminded me of the
first post office in my village.As a child, I
watched the building go up and followed
the transactions going on there. As I
learned to put pen to paper, I watched
postmasters on bicycles bringing sacks of
letters and taking others away.Then came
the blue-painted lorry emblazoned with
“Royal Mail”. As children, we called it
Ogbuaekwu-ugwo, which means Killer-
t h a t - d o e s n ’t - p a y - b a c k . We saw the var-

“The oldest man is the reference book of the
v i l l a g e. This keeps the mind active”
“experiment known as Nigeria” about 20 years
ago in an interview.What phase is the country
in now? 
Nigeria took a huge step to get out of
military dictatorship. However the mili-
tary had been so powerful for so long
that an ordinary civilian leader taking
them on seemed to require too much luck
to succeed.
So Olusegun Obasanjo [a retired
general elected president in 1997]
seemed to be the ideal person to navigate
this problem. He was the only military
ruler ever to hand power back to civil-
i a n s, in 1987.And fin a l l y, he experienced
the terrorism of the military dictator
Sani Abacha and is lucky to be alive.
He has done fairly well. But the
problem of getting Nigeria back to sanity,
let alone prosperity, is far greater than
anyone imagined.So there doesn’t seem
to be a chance for much dramatic
achievement in this first term. But the
fact that we are still knocking about and
asking how we should proceed is a truly
great measure of success.
The fear I have now comes from
rumours that the next president could be
Ibrahim Babangida, the military dictator
preceding Abacha.If we were to get the
notion that the retired generals from the
terrible past will take their turn to rule—
that would be a signal for the ultimate
suicide.
A central question in your work has been about
finding an appropriate form of political repre-
sentation.Does the question still apply?
Finding the form is not diffic u l t , a t
least on paper. But it is difficult when the
economic poverty of the people is so great
that we cannot trust them to exercise con-
trol over who rules them—a situation in
which they would accept a few dollars
from anybody in exchange for their vote.
The level of poverty is crucial in mea-
suring the success of any kind of repre-
s e n t a t i o n .And the most ruthless and cy n-
ical leaders know this. So they plunder
the state and stash the money to use
whenever there is an election.
Western reports on Nigeria’s transition to
democracy almost always evoke the spectre of
an ethnic explosion.How real is the threat?
The ethnic problem is real but an
explosion is not inevitable.You have dif-
ferences in language, culture and history.
But it is important to realize that none of
these ethnic groups were recently
imported into Nigeria.They have all been
there through the millennia. The level
of contact among groups has increased,
but nobody is an intruder. So if it was
possible in the past for these people to live
as near or distant neighbours, then there
is no reason to expect an inevitable explo-
sion today.
Whenever there is a problem, if you
look closely you will find somebody
manipulating differences between people
to serve a purpose of their own.We saw it
clearly at the beginning of our nation-
alist existence, when the British were
planning their exit from Nigeria. Th e y
helped to set one group against another so
that we would fight amongst ourselves
instead of against them.
Our leaders inherited that ability to
create dissension.You saw it at its worst
during our civil war, the Biafran Wa r.
And we have it today with the imposition
of sharia law in parts of the country.O u r
real problem is one of leadership at all
levels.
You once asked in an interview: “How do we
transmit a national culture to Nigerians if not
through works of imagination?” Aren’t you
putting a lot of responsibility on the shoulders
of the artist?
Yes it is heavy. But a little goes a long

w a y. It surprised me for instance when
in 1987 a leader of one of the main parties,
which is based in the Muslim north,a s k e d
me to be his deputy. I joined simply to tell
people that it was possible to go from
eastern Nigeria to a party in the north
that is led by a mullah,an honest man of
integrity. That I was a writer rather than
politician made the proposal doubly
remarkable.
So the writer has a leadership role to play.
Ye s, but you must also explain that
nobody can have all the answers. B y
saying that our problem is one of leader-
ship doesn’t mean that the “ f o l l o w e r s h i p ”
has no work.
Everybody wants to be a leader until
you see the responsibilities it entails.Yo u
see this clearly in a society like mine,
where age, for example, is revered. But
not revered for nothing. The oldest man
is the one who knows most about the
past.He is the reference book of the vil-
lage. That kind of responsibility keeps a
man’s mind active.
When will you go home to take on this role? 
Aaah,I really want to go back home.
But there are a number of serious limita-
tions that have increased since I went
into the wheelchair. I have to consider
for instance such things: is there a hospital
within reach? If I need certain antibi-
otics, will they be available? 
What do you miss most?
The atmosphere of real work. Th e
atmosphere of people who are on the
same page with you. For instance, j u s t
before my accident,I became president of
my town council. The other day, the cur-
rent president wrote to me to ask for my
help with a project for a new library.
Nobody in upstate New York comes and
says, “we want to build a library, can you
help?” I miss being where I am needed
most.
INTERVIEW BY AMY OTCHET
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST
