JULIE BLAIR
REPORTER AT EDUCATION WEEK (U.S.)



C h i c a g o ’s headhunting drive
The “windy city” has embarked on an aggressive drive to court teachers, often weary of working in a
district where a majority of students live in poverty
hree years ago, administrators in the
Chicago Public Schools did little more than
advertise available teaching positions in
local newspapers in an attempt to recruit
educators.
This academic year, t h e y ’ll spend more
than $2 million on the endeavour, d i s p a t c h
headhunters throughout the nation to
locate talent, and develop a partnership
with the city to provide affordable housing
for those they hire.
“In a seller’s market,we have to go out
there and woo people,” said Carlos Ponce,
chief human resources officer for the school
d i s t r i c t . C r i t i c s, h o w e v e r, warn that
ambitious recruiting efforts must be coupled
with well-funded retention policies. “You
can recruit all you want and have wonderful
i n c e n t i v e s, but if working conditions are
not palatable, teachers are going to leave,”
said Barnett Berry of the National
Commission on Teaching & A m e r i c a ’s
F u t u r e, a panel of educators, public offic i a l s,
business and community leaders charged
with analyzing the national teacher
shortage.
Corporate tactics
Like many urban school districts in the
United States, the Chicago Public Schools
has overhauled its approach to attract and
retain teachers. Of the 26,000 educators
now on the payroll, 17 percent will be
eligible to retire next year, Ponce said.A n d
while the state of Illinois produces more
than enough teachers to meet demand,
only a handful want to take on the
challenges of working in America’s third-
largest school district, where 94 percent of
the 432,000 students enrolled are believed
to live in poverty, a figure based on the
number of free lunches distributed.Many
students are black or belong to Hispanic
and other minority groups, a n d
administrators are desperate for educators
to reflect this diversity, as well as for those
who are bilingual, q u a l i fied to teach special
e d u c a t i o n , m a t h e m a t i c s, s c i e n c e, or are
willing to work in schools located within the
poorest neighbourhoods.
“In the past,we used to just sit back and
wait until teachers came to us,”Ponce said.
“What we did [during the 1998-99 school
year] was to institute a corporate-style
recruiting programme.” That meant
allocating significantly more dollars and
manpower to recruitment efforts and
thinking creatively about meeting the needs
of rookie educators. The recruitment
budget was increased from $500,000 to $2.1
million over the past three years, and 12
recruitment officers now do the work once
assigned to two, Ponce said.This year, t h e y ’l l
travel to 60 colleges and universities around
the country to attend job fairs, a strategy
never before implemented.
F u r t h e r m o r e, the headhunters are
offering competitive packages. Beginning
teachers with bachelor’s degrees can earn
between $35,521 and $39,365 their fir s t
year;those with master’s degrees can pull
in between $37,981 and $41,825.E d u c a t o r s
also have the choice of two types of medical
plans and may be eligible for a college debt
cancellation programme offered by the
federal government, provided they choose
to work in a shortage area.To make the deal
even more attractive, the district has
instituted a pilot programme to provide
up to $5,000 in salary advances to be repaid
over a teacher’s first few years of work.
Future plans include embarking on a
partnership with the city to provide housing
assistance for teachers in a city where the
cost of living is high.
To date, the strategies appear to be
working, Ponce said.“During the 1998-99
school year, we brought in 1,900 teachers,”
he said.“In 1999-2000, we did 2,200. This
year, we’re shooting for 3,000.”
Experts, however, point out that there
is no research available to determine which
strategies are most cost-effective. “We’re
getting a number of takers on these things,
but we don’t know what the long term
impact will be,” said Susan Melnick of
Michigan State University.
Success depends on making lasting
changes within the system, she said, from
higher wages and better training to
effectively manage the difficulties of the
modern-day classroom.That will all come
in good time, Ponce said.“None is happier
than me about the national teacher
shortage because it has allowed us to
A HARD SELL FOR T E AC H I N G
Looking for educators who are ready to work in the poorest neighbourhoods.
