who had grown up on the streets
returned to school during the transition
to democracy, the snail’s pace of trans-
formation meant that little or nothing
had actually changed in the classroom.
The poor or non-existent facilities, the
under-qualified teachers and the virtual
failure of racial integration stood as
powerful symbols of ongoing marginali-
zation.So it is no surprise that violence
continues. In lieu of the political resis-
tance movement,m a r g i n a l i z e d ,f r u s t r a t e d
youth found an alternative place of
belonging and social cohesion within cri-
minal youth gangs.
These gangs might only form a small
hard core, but they are teaching us a hard
l e s s o n : we must rebuild the social fabric so
decimated by our Apartheid past. S c h o o l s
provide a vital point of access to young
people who are both the primary perpe-
trators and victims of violence today.The
school is also a contested terrain,p r e c i s e l y
because of the fine line separating youth at
risk inside the classroom and those whose
criminality has been consolidated on the
other side of the fence. It is a very fin e
line, drawn in the dusty sand of township
l i f e. Crime prevention strategies frequently
fail to recognize how easily this line may be
crossed.
Our first initiatives began as a trauma
management programme in Soweto
s c h o o l s, helping teachers identify and
assist those children who might,for ins-
tance, be victims of domestic violence.
This did not happen easily:teachers are
often reluctant to take on issues of school
safety and violence prevention. Th e y
have to be empowered through proper
training and know where to refer trou-
bled children. From this narrow focus
on trauma, we have developed a more
all-encompassing strategy to prevent
school violence. One of most important
lessons we have learned is that students
must be listened to: they know exactly
where crimes are taking place within
and outside the school, and often suggest
practical solutions, such as putting up
lighting here or cutting the grass in a
nearby field.
Going beyond security concerns, we
have stressed the community’s role in
reducing violence.We have set up safety
teams involving teachers, s t u d e n t s,
p a r e n t s, civic organizations and other
local actors, and built better relationships
with the local police. We have encou-
raged schools in dangerous areas to link
with one another.At a broader level,we
have spearheaded multimedia projects,
notably several TV drama series on
human rights, racism and violence in
s c h o o l s, which are aired at prime time.
Taking stock of this holistic approach,
the government has recently tuned into
these and other grassroots initiatives to
tackle school crime more effectively.Th e
idea is not to fence off the school,but to
build bridges with communities and
recreate a sense of belonging in society.
■
GRAEME SIMPSON
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRE FOR
THE STUDY OF VIOLENCE AND RECONCILIATION,
JOHANNESBURG (www.csvr.org.za)



South A f r i c a : beyond exclusion
During the apartheid era, township schools were sites of violent political
struggle. Today, they are all too often at the mercy of criminal activity. The
answers lie with society as a whole, not just the school
VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS: A WO R L DWIDE A F FA I R

Idealt drugs at school,”“Pupil shot for cell
phone,” “Depression might have led to
suicide of 11-year-old boy,” “ S t u d e n t s
seek revenge for teacher killing.”This is
just a sampling of a few recent headlines
in South African newspapers.Youth gangs
are intruding into the schools of vulne-
rable communities, using them as mar-
kets for drugs, a l c o h o l , weapons and
young girls, who are being abducted and
raped.
No effective strategy for preventing
violence in schools can be developed unless
we understand the legacy of apartheid.
Under this regime, young black high school
children were the barometer of systematic
marginalization and powerlessness.
The education system was designed as
a means of colonial control,and delibera-
tely aimed at preparing students to be no
more than “hewers of wood and drawers of
w a t e r ” to service the affluent white-owned
i n d u s t r y.The school was oppressive, but it
also became a site of highly politicized
s t r u g g l e, a vehicle through which young
black people could assert their stake and
role in society. Many youths established
an alternative subculture in which the rites
of passage and means of acquiring status
were often premised on proving them-
selves through direct involvement in vio-
l e n c e. It was noble to be on the wrong side
of illegitimate laws. Violence was socially
approved in the name of liberation: t h e
heroes of the day were young men who
carried guns and fought.
Although many of these youngsters
Students must be
listened to: they know
exactly where crimes
are taking place.
