C
linical trials are a building block of current
medical practice, carried out to show the
advantages of a new approach to treat-
m e n t . But just doing the trial is not enough:
s c i e n t i fic rigour requires that it undergo
peer review and publication in a medical journal before
changes in clinical practice can occur.
Physicians who had no part in the trial closely exa-
mine it for potential flaws and provide advice to
journal editors. The latter assume that the authors
helped design the study,had full access to the
data and all relevant information before
interpreting the data.Once published,
physicians can make informed deci-
s i o n s, confident that the medical
journal is providing a full and
unbiased appraisal of the treat-
ment.
But recent developments
have put this procedure to
the test. Two decades ago,
trials were done by an
alliance between academic
investigators and commer-
cial sponsors. A c a d e m i c s
were largely responsible for designing trials.
The sponsor provided the money and mate-
rial required to handle the huge volume of
d a t a . Manuscripts reporting trial results were
jointly written by academic and commercial spon-
s o r s ; when they were submitted for publication,
the major authors were often the academic
scientists who had performed key roles
in the trial, giving it enhanced credibi-
lity.
Much of this has changed. Over the past
d e c a d e,many academics have moved to industrial
p o s t s.As a result, sponsors now have substantial exper-
tise in trial design, performance and data interpreta-
t i o n . Scientists working for industry are more likely to
design trials which cast their product in a favourable
l i g h t . Rather than including academic investigators
from the outset, these individuals may be presented
with a trial that has already been designed. Th e
s p o n s o r, who often prepares the manuscript for sub-
mission to a medical journal, h o l d s, and may limit
access to, all the data.The problem is that the sponsor
is not dispassionate about trial results.
There have been a number of well-publicized
cases (see p. 2 0 ) , where sponsors have suppressed
results of clinical trials. What bothered editors the
m o s t , h o w e v e r, were related practices that occur
much more commonly, but in less egregious fashion.
A sponsor may prepare a manuscript in which all
the data of importance are not included or in which
the unwanted side effects of a new approach to the-
rapy are minimized.Putting an interpretational spin
on reported data is not fair to the patients who volun-
teered for the trials or to the broader
community of patients and physi-
c i a n s. We deserve to get a com-
plete and unbiased report of
research results; drug marketing
should not be a consideration
in preparing a report.
In September 2001, the
International Council of
Medical Journal Editors
(ICMJE), an alliance of
the editors of 12 general
medical journals, a d-
opted new rules concer-
ning the ethics of clinical
trial performance and reporting. A c a d e m i c
physicians now need to give assurances that
they have had a meaningful role in trial
design,complete and unlimited access to
the data base, and an uncensored role in
data interpretation and manuscript prepa-
ration. The ICMJE believes these rules will
help everyone. They will provide aca-
demic physicians with needed leverage
as they negotiate research contracts with
sponsors and will empower them to ana-
lyze all the available data fairly.They will aid patients
and physicians by providing additional assurances
that all the information about a new treatment is
p r o v i d e d . They will help commercial sponsors by
levelling the playing field.
Medical treatment has been substantially
advanced by new medical devices and pharmaceuti-
cals.We want this progress to continue, but we want
to be sure that the process of reporting trials is as free
as possible from commercial bias; we believe that
these new rules will help achieve this end. ■
JEFFREY DRAZEN
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF OFTHE NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE, PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE AT HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL



In the name of a fair trial
Medical journals play a pivotal role in establishing a drug’s safety.
To curb the influence of private firms on reporting results, the most
prestigious journals are tightening publication guidelines 
