Universities as autonomous communities of teachers and students are a
creation of the medieval West.The earliest such centres of higher lear-
ning sprang up in Bologna and Paris around 1200.Others soon followed in
O x f o r d , C a m b r i d g e, M o n t p e l l i e r, To u l o u s e, Padua and Salamanca. Th e r e
were over 60 by the late 15th century.The men who formed them,such as
the philosopher Siger de Brabant,the theologian Thomas Aquinas and the
physician Arnaud de Villeneuve, met, often with scant resources, to study
various disciplines, including philosophy, medicine, law and theology. Soon
they were fighting for their autonomy, in other words for the freedom to orga-
nize their courses as they saw fit,teach the students of their choice, confer
diplomas and hire professors.
At a time when law was fragmented into many customs and essentially pro-
tected the local people, u n i v e r s i t i e s, which drew teachers and students
from far and wide, inspired mistrust from the authorities and townsmen.Th e y
needed special protection.
Once acquired, autonomy did not necessarily mean total independence. It had
to be guaranteed by a higher authority who granted written privileges. For
a long time, the Church kept all forms of teaching under its control.It was
the Pope who granted the earliest university privileges, riding roughshod over
those who traditionally supervised schools: b i s h o p s, towns and the prince’s
local representatives, insofar as the secular powers also intervened very early
on.
The expression libertas scolastica appeared in Paris in 1231.To a certain extent,
academic freedoms coincided with what we call freedom of teaching today,
but they still remained under the Church’s tight control. Above all they
involved the right to live and work in peace, and exemption from city taxes,
military service and arrest,trial and imprisonment.
Academic freedoms borrowed much from ecclesiastic liberties: s t u d e n t s
and teachers, whether men of the cloth or not,were in a situation compa-
rable to that of clergymen,who were subject only to ecclesiastical courts,
which had a reputation for being more fair. They could only be tried by
their own institution — professors and the rector, the elected head of the uni-
versity — or by the pope or his representatives.
As such,one of the main aspects of academic freedom was the emergence
of separate university courts that meted out their own justice, setting tea-
chers and students apart from the rest of society.The law was the same throu-
ghout the West for everyone who belonged to those supranational institu-
tions that were, in essence, the first universities.
In the late Middle Ages, the rise of state-like entities meant that academic
freedoms became part of a new political framework, as simple practices
exempt from common law and still subject to revision.A venerable vestige
of the one-time independence and privileges granted by the prince, they now
acquired an ambiguous status. ■
Jacques Verger, professor of medieval history at the Université de Paris-Sor -
bonne, author of “French Universities in the Middle Ages”   (published in
French by Brill, Leiden, 1995).



THE BIRTH OF ACADEMIC FREEDOM
