INTERVIEW BY SHIRAZ SIDHVA
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



“Getting into the other’s shoes”
Ecuador’s former environment minister Yolanda Kakabadse once said that “my
heart is in conservation, but my head tells me I must be fair to my country.”
Today, as head of the World Conservation Union*, she calls for a better
understanding between North and South
Do you believe that the current enviro n-
mental agenda is increasingly driven by rich
countries?
A majority of industrialized countries
are more active than developing ones in
international debates. For one, they have
the means:it’s so costly to participate that
you often find a huge team of highly tech-
nical people from developed countries and
few representatives from developing ones.
Recent debates on climate change and bio-
diversity have been clear signs that some
countries in the South might not have the
capacity to enter all the technical debates.
Do you believe that countries like Ecuador
are targets of eco-imperialism?
I think the term is overrated. I’m not
sure we’re sending out the right message
with it.There are clearly signs of developed
countries trying to impose on others. But on
the other hand, developing countries have
gained a lot of information about environ-
mental protection over the past decade
through these negotiations. There is
obviously an interest on everyone’s part
to see that the natural resources and the
environment of the planet are dealt with.
And most of these resources are concen-
trated in the tropical areas, where many
developing countries are.
I t ’s not just a North-South issue:s o m e-
times I see signs of  “imperialism” within
our own countries, when a sector or group
tries to impose a management pattern or
policy.
As an activist, you campaigned against
shrimp farming and had to defend that
industry when you were a minister (1998-
2000).How did you reconcile that?
Is it fair to tell Ecuador not to harvest
shrimps—a major export—because the
mangroves are an important eco-system, o r
should the answer be to explore whether it
is possible to harvest shrimps and protect
mangroves at the same time? I’m absolutely
convinced that you can do both,at least in
the case of shrimps. You just move the
shrimp pools a little further back from the
mangroves and achieve the two goals.
Did you actually manage to do that?
We did in some places,but the majority
of the pools had already been built where
the mangroves were. It was not just the
industry that was to blame:it’s only in the
past decade that people in the North and
South have become aware of the impor-
tance of mangrove conservation.
How would you have reacted if other coun-
tries had sought to impose a trade ban on
certain products from Ecuador?
I would be totally against trade sanc-
t i o n s.We destroyed the mangroves without
realizing their value.To come 30 years later
and blame us for doing something wrong is
not the right attitude. Instead we should
come up with a way to stop environmental
damage while enhancing the capacity of a
country like Ecuador to produce goods for
the world market.
Has the relationship between North and
South evolved on environmental issues?
There is a better understanding in the
North that imposing solutions won’t take us
anywhere, that teamwork is essential.The
S o u t h ,m e a n w h i l e, has realized that it does
hold some decision-making power. Deve-
loped countries certainly have a better
appreciation of poor countries’ concerns,
partly because more information is avai-
l a b l e.The building of partnerships between
the two sides has also increased.
Do you believe that conflicting intere s t s
over the conventions currently being for-
mulated can be resolved?
The big challenge is how to strike a
balance between conservation and deve-
lopment—sustainable development.That is
what we must fight for. A l s o, t h e r e ’s no
process in the world that doesn’t involve
c o n fli c t . C o n flicts aren’t necessarily bad,
they arise from differences of opinion based
on different cultures, e x p e c t a t i o n s, b a c k-
grounds, drives and ambitions. We have to
invest in generating the capacity world-
wide to manage these conflicts and unders-
tand each other’s points of view better.
What would you advise both sides to do?
You have to understand the other cul-
t u r e, and both sides must do this by getting
into the other’s shoes, which entails loo-
king at values, needs and conditions within
any culture. That would improve the rela-
tionships of different continents and coun-
tries dramatically. ■
* The World Conservation Union (IUCN)
is an umbrella organization of nearly a
thousand NGOs, based in Gland (Swit-
zerland).
http://www.iucn.org
