When UN E S C O’s Oral and Intangible
Heritage of Humanity list was
announced in Paris last May, s e v e r a l
Spaniards dashed out of the ceremony
and shouted jubilantly into mobile
phones.They were letting people know
that the mystery play of Elche had been
proclaimed a masterpiece. The news
spread like wildfire in the southern
Spanish town and soon hundreds of
people were out in the streets, l e t t i n g
off fireworks in an early start to the next
day’s official festivities.
Such delight might seem a bit over
the top, since Elche already figures on
the World Heritage List with El Palmeral,
a grove of date palms planted at the time
of the Arab invasion 1,000 years ago when
the town was in Muslim hands. But El
Palmeral doesn’t move the people of
Elche half as much as the “Misteri d’Elx,”
as it is known in the local Va l e n c i a n
language.
Attracting media
attention
Every year, on August 14 and 15,300
volunteers stage a play in the town’s Santa
Maria Basilica depicting the death,
assumption and coronation of the Vi r g i n
M a r y.The sacred musical drama is a part
of the town’s cultural and linguistic
identity that has been maintained since
the 15th century.
The first to appreciate a cultural
treasure being put on the Intangible
Heritage List are those at the heart of
such masterpieces—such as the five
Indians who still speak the Zápara
language in the jungles of the Amazon or
the storytellers of the Djamma el-Fna
Square in Marrakesh (Morocco). All of
them are proud the world has recognized
the deepest roots of their identity.
Getting on the list can also mean an
end to decades of media indifference.
India has thus rediscovered the
Kuttiyattam dance theatre, kept alive
today by five Chakyar families in the
southern part of the country. In China, t h e
oldest and one of the most influ e n t i a l
theatrical traditions, Ku n q u , has become
the talk of the town.Such treasures were
recognized already, but their arrival on
the list gives them “a new dimension,”
says Noriko A i k a w a , head of UNESCO’s
Intangible Heritage Section. This sudden
fame is the key to raising funds, getting
the authorities involved and securing
international help.
Getting straight
with history
This has happened with the Garifuna
culture in Central A m e r i c a , which was
put on the list for its language,music and
dances. The Garifuna people (known as
Garinagu or Black Caribs) are
descendants of rebel African slaves who
live in Belize (which presented their
c a n d i d a cy) and along the coasts of
Honduras, Nicaragua and Guatemala.
To prevent their language from dying
o u t , teachers from Belize’s National
Garifuna Council went to Nicaragua to
keep it alive. Roy Cayetano, B e l i z e ’s
deputy minister for rural development
and culture, says that after the list’s
a n n o u n c e m e n t , Nicaraguan culture
ministry officials asked if they could
support the project.This is important for
plans to standardize Garifuna spelling,
and provides valuable recognition for the
11,000 or so Garifuna scattered in 10
communities in the four countries.
UN E S C O will also be funding other
projects submitted by the new list
members to preserve and promote such
endangered cultural treasures. ■
ASBEL LÓPEZ
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



A tangible debut
A new era is beginning for the 19 cultural treasures that have been declared Masterpieces
of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO
P R E S E RVING THE MAG I C
In Bolivia, the annual Oruro Carnival features a ceremonial parade involving 20,000 dancers.
