GYÖRGY MOLDOVA
ONEOF HUNGARY’S BESTSELLING AUTHORS, WHOSE SERIOUSWORKSINCLUDE “THE DANUBE IS BURNING”



A tale of two dams
An author renowned for his sense of humour takes a grim view
of a political row between his native Hungary and Slovakia in which
the Danube is held hostage
W
e may thank rivers for life: b r i n g i n g
water to drink, to nourish our fie l d s
and to carry our boats. There is only
one problem: they are exceptionally
suited to forming borders. Instead of
uniting people bound for a common destiny, s u s p i c i o u s
n a t i o n s, often incited by clashing politics, glare at each
other like wolves from opposing shores. I have seen
such venom flowing along the Danube between Hungary
and Slovakia.
The Danube has always been a tempestuous force,
bringing alternating waves of calamity.Either it was too
a b u n d a n t , forcing entire villages to seek higher
ground,or it was too feeble, leaving fields to wither
and causing a sudden halt to navigation.
The Roman emperors Tiberius and Trajan were
the first to hire civil engineers to devise ways of
protecting their banks from the fickle Danube. Many
would follow their example, but it was not before the
20th century that the technicians would muster the
power and tools to tame the river.
By 1951, serious plans were underway to build a
series of dams along the Danube in Hungary and
C z e c h o s l o v a k i a .The Soviet Union was anxious to alter
the river’s shallow reaches which were hampering the
shipment of its goods in Eastern Europe.At that time,
few questioned the wisdom of “correcting mother
n a t u r e ”and it was considered a scientifically proven fact
that a river the size of the Danube required not just one
dam,but several.Otherwise, sediments would collect
and disrupt navigation and damage embankments,
causing bridges to collapse. It would take another
2 0 years to iron out the technical and financial
arrangements but in September 1977,the Republic of
Hungary and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
signed a now infamous treaty to build the Gabcikovo-
Nagymaros dam system.
Grinding the axe
of the opposition
The region was clearly suffering. Au t h o r i t i e s
recorded more than 100 days of shallow waters a year,
which damaged the wild flora and left several hundred
ships stranded along a 250-kilometre stretch of the
r i v e r. While the project was originally intended to
improve navigation, it grew to include hydroelectricity
as the oil shocks of the 1970s intensified.
A large reservoir would be built at Dunakiliti,
which straddled both countries. From there, a 17-km
canal would divert 90 to 95 percent of the Danube’s flo w
to a hydroelectric dam and powerplant in Gabcikovo
in Czechoslovakia. About 100 km downstream in
Hungary at Nagymaros, another power station and
dam would even the river’s flow.
Construction began in 1978 based upon plans drawn
up by world-famous Hungarian,Slovak and Austrian
water experts,against whom accusations of a technical
nature could hardly have been raised—not so against
their political inclinations, as it was later revealed.
By the end of the 1980s, the powers waiting to
relieve the socialist system of Eastern Europe lurked in
the shadows. Yet they could hardly demand the
departure of the occupying Soviet army, or indeed  a
multi-party system. I n s t e a d , they demonstrated on
environmental grounds and found an obvious target in
the ongoing construction of the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros
d a m s. It was like a chink in the system’s wall into which
the opposition could wedge its demolition axe, held at
the ready.
Protestors marched en masse down the streets of
Budapest and along the banks beside Nagymaros.
Anybody who had anything to do with the project was
declared a Stalinist, or worse, a traitor to his country.A s
public pressure intensifie d , the Hungarian government
decided to suspend the half-finished construction.Th e
culmination came in 1990 when the right-wing
government took power and unilaterally cancelled the
treaty.

But the Czechoslovak side paid no heed to the
Hungarians and carried on with the work further
u p s t r e a m .The authorities unilaterally decided to divert
a 25-kilometre stretch of the Danube, which served as
part of the border between the two countries, into its
own territory,where another dam was built to replace
the one intended for Hungary.Gabcikovo would not be
as powerful as planned,but it would be operational.
Fish in the mud
Protest marches similar to those in
Hungary had no effect.History was not
on the demonstrators’ side. A s
Czechoslovakia divided into two parts,
Slovakia came to see Gabcikovo as the
symbol of their independent state, born in
1993.
By the end of October 1992, t h e
Danube was diverted and the main
channel stretching across Hungarian
territory suddenly lost 90 to 95 percent of
its water. Signs indicating the river’s water
level were left standing on dry land.
Groundwater levels in surrounding areas
dropped by two or three metres days after
the Danube stopped feeding its streams.
Fish were trapped in the old basin, left to
asphyxiate in the mud.
The Hungarians could not believe
the drama unfolding before them.
Extremist elements spoke of blowing up
the obstructing dam. Fo r t u n a t e l y, t h i s
threat was soon replaced by negotiations
fostered by the European Community,
which was already panicked by
bloodshed in the Balkans. Both sides sat
down to talk, yet the balance of power was skewed in
S l o v a k i a ’s favour.With firm control of the lion’s share
of the river’s water supply and energy output, it took
little notice of Hungarian wishes. In April 1993, t h e
dispute was submitted to the International Court of
Justice in The Hague.
In 1994, the Socialists came back into power in
Hungary but could hardly back out of the court case,
which was hailed as a landmark:for the first time, the
court would rule over an environmental dispute. But
this case was about politics, not water.And so the court
handed down an ambiguous decision in 1997, which
both parties could interpret to their advantage. Th e
1977 treaty was still valid,according to the ruling, but
each side was at fault for acting unilaterally—Hungary
for pulling out and Slovakia for continuing with the
c o n s t r u c t i o n . They were called upon to negotiate in
good faith. Even though the court had no way of
enforcing its ruling, both sides returned to the
negotiating table.Anxious to join the European Union,
the two governments wanted to show their wealthy
Western neighbours that they could resolve their
disputes in a civilized manner.The outline of a mutually
acceptable agreement was drawn up to finally complete
the project and resolve key environmental concerns.
Once again, politics intervened. Hungary’s right-
wing opposition joined forces with the “ s t o r m i n g ”
Greens and together they organized mass
d e m o n s t r a t i o n s.For a second time in less than a decade,
they managed to use the same weapons to force the
government to back down. Yet this time, the Socialist
government was keeling before the final deathblow of
parliamentary elections in 1998.
Weak resolve
In their manifesto, the right-wing elements at the
helm of the new government promised to remedy the
Danube. Yet three and a half years later, not a single
worthy step has been taken. Hungary has however,
been spending millions of dollars to take down the
half-built dam and might be forced to spend millions
more to compensate Slovakia for pulling out of the
d e a l . There is talk of forming more committees or
returning to the International Court of Justice—a sure
sign that both countries are still not committed to
resolving the situation.Their true colours will inevitably
show soon—both will hold parliamentary elections in
2002.
Take a stroll along the two banks of the Danubian
basin today and you will see that the Gabcikovo region
in Slovakia is thriving, while on the Hungarian side, t h e
land which was supposed to store water has been
overrun by weeds. And the Danube? The Danube
carries not water, it carries politics, dirty politics. ■
Hand in hand: protestors around the Gabcikovo dam region.
