SHIRAZ SIDHVA
UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST



Testifying from the fro n t
Modern wars are fought with huge propaganda machines or through the rule of
terror. How can a journalist in the midst of conflict decipher the truth?
he first casualty when war comes, is truth,”
observed U. S. Senator Hiram Johnson in
the midst of World War I. Nearly a cen-
tury and many conflicts later, technolo-
gical advances have brought wars into
living rooms across the world.But truth
still remains the first casualty, b u r i e d
under layers of propaganda, vested inter-
ests and fear.
Reporting from the battlefront has
never been technically easier, with satel-
lite phones and live news relayed in real-
time. But this has only accentuated the
dilemmas that journalists encounter when
covering confli c t s : authoritarian regimes
and even democracies go to even greater
lengths to conceal the truth.
The last century has seen large-scale
battles between countries give way to
deadly internecine confli c t s, often bet-
ween governments and their own people.
From Africa to East Ti m o r, from Kashmir
and Sri Lanka to the killing fields of
Chechnya, Bosnia,Colombia and Sierra
L e o n e,old ethnic hatred is rekindled,a n d
wars are fought not on battlefronts but in
the midst of civilian populations. Accor-
ding to Robert Manoff, director of New
York University’s Center for Wa r, P e a c e,
and the News Media,mass violence is so
“universalized” that there are currently
over 200 communal groups fighting poli-
tical and military wars in 93 countries.
The media’s role remains essentially
to act as a messenger.Yet journalists also
have the power to change the course of
c o n flicts by influencing public opinion.
“ The outcomes of these small, p o s t -
modern wars may depend as much on
how they are perceived as on how they
are fought,” writes Tom Gjelten of U.S.
National Public Radio. Gjelten,who has
covered major conflicts worldwide,
believes journalists must recognize that
their task is not to please diplomats or
facilitate peace processes,but to describe
a conflict as truthfully as possible.
Local journalists
are prime targets
Do the exigencies of war justify a dif-
ferent set of ethics from those of peace-
time? The principles are essentially the
s a m e, but for one major difference: j o u r-
nalists are more vulnerable in war. I n
Sierra Leone, East Timor and Chechnya,
the bulletproof jackets that Western jour-
nalists donned provided little protection
from the wrath of a killer squad or a vin-
dictive soldier’s bullet. For local journa-
l i s t s, the terrors are even starker. Y v e s
S o r o k o b i , who coordinates the A f r i c a
programme for the Committee to Pro-
tect Journalists, recounts that ten repor-
ters were executed by rebels in Sierra
Leone over 21 days in 1999 (see box).
Reporting is also hampered by

Rwanda 1994:Magnum photographer James Nachtwey carries an orphaned baby to shelter while cameras zoom in on a suspected

government restrictions on access to
trouble spots.Since 1995,hardly any jour-
nalists in Sri Lanka have had access to the
area where the government is fighting a
deadly battle with the separatist guer-
rilla group, the Liberation of Tamil Ti g e r s ’
Eelam.“We don’t get anywhere close to
the confli c t ,” says Nirupama Subrama-
n i a n , special correspondent of The Hindu
in Colombo. I n s t e a d , both sides transmit
their version of the news via contradictory
press releases.“It is a fax war we are cove-
r i n g,” Subramanian says.“ Th e r e ’s no way
of knowing the truth.”
The proliferation of real-time news
has made political control even tighter.
Journalists often find they have little trai-
ning for the choices they are forced to
make in tense situations.When two coun-
tries are at war,whose “ t r u t h ” should the
correspondent convey—that of the
country to which the journalist belongs or
that of the enemy,whose version might be
more compelling? For the writer and war
correspondent John Pilger, it is exactly
this “virulence of an unrecognized cen-
s o r s h i p,often concealed behind false prin-
ciples of objectivity”that serves to “ m i n i-
mize and deny the culpability of We s t e r n
power in acts of great violence and ter-
rorism,such as the Gulf and Kosovo.”
Powerless observers
of unfolding dramas?
War reporting has nevertheless come
a long way since the two world wars,w h e n
most journalism was an uncritical arm of
the war effort.Twenty years later, g o v e r n-
ments learnt from Vietnam that unres-
tricted access to war zones, particularly
with the advent of television,was poten-
tial political suicide. In his classic book
The First Casualty, Phillip Knightley
concludes that the freedom journalists
had to operate in Vietnam “to go anyw-
here, see anything, and write what they
liked is not going to be given again.”
“In a democracy,you cannot get away
with the crude authoritarianism of clo-
sing down newspapers or taking over
b r o a d c a s t e r s,” w r i t e s
Steven Barnett, senior lec-
turer in communications
at the University of We s t-
m i n s t e r,reviewing Knight-
l e y ’s book. “ You can,
h o w e v e r, have a subtle
mixture of information
c o n t r o l , drip-feed propa-
ganda stories about the
e n e m y, cosy briefings for
‘friendly’ journalists and
more blatant attempts at
intimidation for the less
o b l i g i n g.”
The British devised an
excellent strategy to
manage the media during
the Falklands war in
1982—they denied access,
except to “ f r i e n d l y ” j o u r-
nalists willing to report
defence briefin g s.
The Gulf War was the
first in history where the
public expected regular
reporting from an
“ e n e m y ” capital under
s i e g e.Fought mostly from
the air, with attacks deep within enemy
t e r r i t o r y, it was impossible for interna-
tional journalists to verify military infor-
mation or report on Iraqi casualties. I t
was only later that the deceptions were
e x p o s e d , whether it was Iraqis fli n g i n g
premature Kuwaiti babies out of incuba-
tors (which turned out to be the work of
an American public relations agency com-
missioned by the Kuwaiti government), o r
the filmed preparations for an allied lan-
ding on the Kuwaiti coast, which was
never part of the military plan.
During the NATO bombing of Serbia
in 1999, the press was actively used to
drum up public support. The pitfalls of
instant news became all too obvious during
the confli c t .With 2,700 media personnel in
the region when NATO entered Kosovo
(compared with 500 in Vietnam at the
w a r ’s peak), the war could have produced
unprecedented free and fair reporting.
But instead, the story behind the sound
bytes was missing.“ The public drowned in
wave after wave of images that added up
to nothing,” writes Knightley.
Above all the clamour, h o w e v e r,
several war correspondents have worked
at great risk. John Burns of the New Yo r k
Ti m e s, a Pulitzer Prize winner, spent more
than a year in besieged Sarajevo, sharing
many nights of terror with the local people
to tell the world what was really going
on. For such journalists, objectivity may
have little to do with neutrality,e s p e c i a l l y
when the choice is between hapless vic-
tims and perpetrators of genocidal crimes.
For many reporters, the greatest
dilemma comes down to how involved
they should get. O f t e n , journalists are
overwhelmed by fear and helplessness,
but are still called upon to provide the
only link between a war-afflicted people
and the outside world.“I couldn’t stop the
smallest part of it,” recalled Lindsey
Hilsum of the British news service ITN
about reporting the massacres of Tutsis in
Rwanda in 1994.“I could only watch and
s u r v i v e.” Yet Hilsum decided to testify
before the International Criminal Tr i-
bunal for Rwanda. “It was not my res-
p o n s i b i l i t y,and testifying could even have
compromised my role as a journalist,”
ted Hutu death squad member.
“You can have a subtle
mix of information
control, drip-feed
propaganda stories,
cosy briefings and
more blatant attempts
at intimidation.”

she explained.“But I also have responsi-
bilities as a human being.”
Courses at journalism school and pro-
fessional guidelines drawn up by media
organizations like the Freedom Fo r u m
are widening the debate on professiona-
lism in war reporting, though most agree
that the basic qualities needed are inte-
grity and a good dose of common sense.
Anthony Borden, executive director of
the Institute of War and Peace Reporting
in London, stresses the importance of
engaging and valuing the work of local
j o u r n a l i s t s, especially at a time when com-
mercial pressures threaten the continued
coverage of conflicts in regions not per-
ceived to have strategic importance.
Given all the dangers, why do journa-
lists choose to cover certain conflicts? It is
unlikely they do it for fame or fortune, or
as some people believe, for the thrill of it.
Most reporters believe their writing will
make a difference. The legendary corres-
pondent Martha Gellhorn, who covered
wars for nearly half a century, explained it
b e s t : “… in all my reporting life, I have
thrown small pebbles into a very large
p o n d , and I have no way of knowing if any
pebble caused the slightest ripple. I don’t
need to worry about that.” ■
