S.D.
…and the spy
who loves us all
T
H E picturesque streets of Edinburgh
(Scotland) are currently playing host to
an extraordinary episode in the ancient
struggle between individual privacy and
state power. H e r e, at the headquarters
of the Lothian and Borders Po l i c e, the DNA of the
local population is being systematically archived.
For the past two years,every person arrested or
detained by Edinburgh police has been forced to
take a DNA test. The offences that warrant this
practice are not confined to the obvious categories
of murder, rape and burglary, but also to traffic
o f f e n c e s, s h o p l i f t i n g, and public order transgres-
sions such as breach of the peace.
The collection and storage of DNA must surely
rank as one of the most intimate invasions of the
person,and yet the policy appears to have secured
substantial public support.A recent opinion poll sug-
gests that nearly three-quarters of the local popu-
lation would be willing to give up their DNA in
the “pursuit of a crime.”
The UK Home Office and other government
agencies have also been excited by the potential of
DNA testing. Recent Child Support Agency legis-
lation requires all alleged runaway fathers to submit
to a DNA test. Failure to do so is tantamount in law
to an admission of guilt.
The current mania for DNA testing is merely a
symptom of a much broader trend throughout the
w o r l d . In the past, surveillance was based on the tar-
geting of specific individuals or groups. In recent
y e a r s, governments and private sector organiza-
tions have moved to incorporate it into almost
every aspect of our finances, communication and
lifestyle. While paying lip service to privacy, they
argue that surveillance is necessary to maintain
law and order and to promote economic effic i e n cy.
The rationale is often self-serving, and somewhat
b o g u s, but a substantial number of people have
nevertheless been persuaded that the surrender
of privacy is the price we must pay for a better and
safer society.
The result is that many countries are becoming
surveillance societies. There has probably never
been a time in history when so much information has
been amassed on the population-at-large. Details of
the average economically active adult in the deve-
loped world are located in around 400 major data-
bases—enough processed data to compile a formi-
dable reference book for each person.
It is common wisdom that the power, capacity
and speed of information technology are accelera-
ting rapidly.The extent of privacy invasion—or cer-
tainly the potential to invade privacy — i n c r e a s e s
correspondingly. But it is not merely the increased
capacity and decreasing cost of information tech-
nology that creates threats to privacy. G l o b a l i z a t i o n
of systems such as the Internet removes geogra-
phical limitations (and legal protections) to data
flo w s. Modern information systems are increasingly
compatible and can exchange and process diffe-
rent forms of data.Meanwhile multimedia, which
fuses many forms of transmission and expression of
data and images, creates vast difficulties for legis-
lators wishing to protect personal privacy.
An example: the company UK InfoDisc has
produced a CD-ROM that merges the electoral
roll data with the telephone book and geo-demo-
graphic data.So now the most basic and innocent
information about you can be entered into the disc,
revealing all manner of facts. Your telephone
number leads instantly to your address.Your name
leads automatically to your occupation and age. It
goes without saying that the finance and credit

21
i n d u s t r y,private investigators, n e w s p a p e r s, m a r k e-
ting companies and police all make extensive use of
the product.
These issues are important because the growing
informational bond between citizen and state (and of
course the private sector) is nibbling away at human
a u t o n o m y. As decision-making by institutions
becomes automated, the factors that affect our lives
are made on the basis of an increasing mass of inti-
mate personal data.The risk of statelessness or dis-
crimination correspondingly intensifies.
In developing countries, the threat is magni-
fied. The perfect identification of individuals can
have fatal consequences. Governments of develo-
ping nations rely on first world countries to supply
them with equipment for digital wiretapping, trac-
king and deciphering data along with scanners, b u g s
and computer intercept systems. The transfer of
surveillance technology from first to third world
(sometimes known as the repression trade) is now
a lucrative sideline for the arms industry. Wh i l e
information technology companies routinely pro-
mote their products as a means of achieving social
reform,the human rights community increasingly
d e fines them as a means of social and political
control.
In this environment, the struggle to strike a
balance between individual autonomy and state
power is more complex than ever. Not surprisingly,
no other fundamental right in the public policy arena
has generated such turbulence and controversy as pri-
v a cy. While the international community has rea-
ched a baseline consensus on torture, d i s c r i m i n a-
tion and racial hatred, p r i v a cy is viewed by many
governments and corporations as the bogeyman of
human rights.While opinion polls consistently indi-
cate that people care about privacy,public opposition
even to the most blatant intrusion is sporadic.
In the United States, the fingerprinting of wel-
fare recipients has proceeded with scarcely a

murmur of discontent,while in Australia,attempts
by the federal government to introduce a national
identity card sparked the biggest public protest in
recent memory.And yet while Australian legislation
forcing banks to report suspicious transactions
passed without notice, similar legislation in the U. S.
provoked more than a quarter of a million written
c o m p l a i n t s. In Germany and Au s t r a l i a ,proposals to
introduce digital phone services sparked wides-
pread privacy concerns. Identical technology in Bri-
tain was introduced with little or no discussion.
The most dangerous enemy of privacy,h o w e v e r,
is the well-meaning individual who argues “I have
nothing to hide, so I have nothing to fear.” N o t h i n g
could be further from the truth. Everyone has a
sphere of private life which must be protected from
i n t r u s i o n . Few people could honestly claim that
their life—their family details, financial affairs and
health history—is an open book.Even if this were
s o, their happy position should not provide a ration-
ale for the invasion of other people’s lives.
But the argument for privacy goes well beyond
the integrity and autonomy of each individual.
Privacy is the fundamental test of a free society’s
s t r e n g t h .The right to privacy is the right to protect
ourselves against intrusion by the outside world. I t
is the measure we use to set limits on the demands
made upon us. It is the right we invoke to defend
our personal freedom, our autonomy and our
identity. It is the basis upon which we assess the
balance of power between ourselves and the world
around us.
P r i v a cy is also the natural partner of freedom of
expression. They are equal and compatible rights.
More so, both have evolved in the modern context
as a synergy.As the world embraces the information
society and our lives go increasingly on-line, t h e
forces that promote censorship also diminish pri-
vacy—and vice versa.
It will become apparent in the coming years
that these two rights will form the Great Pillars of
any free society. ■
