Ku i t o, a child’s
of war and infi
“Children in their white Sunday best walk the city from north to south…”

The children’s days pass like light scattering on the wings of a bird.Small waves
buoy them along, their fragile bones, their vast souls opened wide towards
the sky.
A sense of eternity lies in each window turned toward the light,the sun
glides in through blankets of pollen settling on the ground.Children move
forth as if the world under their little feet was a theatre stage. Far in the
distance, the rumours of fountains can still be heard.
C h i l d r e n ’s laughter fills the silence,as if the soul of the rain had risen and
was beckoning the rivers to return and tempt wheat, maize and manioc
from the earth. Every wall is a mountain, and the higher one climbs, the farther
one sees into the future. Through the doors of grand,darkened houses, the
voices of adults, slow and unstinting as the afternoon,gather letters of the
alphabet and dreams to teach children of vanquished utopias, the secrets of
the wind and the two-times table.
The day advances in the wake of birds—the birds who leave small grains
behind so they can retrace their steps and dream once again.
These children live free,while the clocks, jammed by bullets,are destined
to repeat time, just as the to and fro of bells sounds the cycle of birth and
death.
They tame the silence, sowing laughter into the folds of day.There is still
milk in their laughter, fermenting the hopes of an afternoon.Beyond the doors
of houses, the children are exploring the labyrinthine walls.They have a key
for everything—even to the stairs that they climb up to reach the sky, b a r e d
by a missing roof.They sleep on the ground,parched by bullets, under a sheet
of stars that slowly descends until the light is eclipsed and night ushered in.
PHOTOS BY GUY TILLIM,TEXT BY ANA PAULA TAVARES
GUY TILLIM IS A FORMER ECONOMIST FROM SOUTH AFRICA;
ANA PAULA TAVARESISAN ANGOLAN POETANDWRITER
“Through something small, one can sometimes discover
the great things of life; there is no need to explain, one
simply has to look.”
Drawing on the wisdom of her countryman
and fellow writer Ondjaki, the Angolan poet
Ana Paula Tavares reflects on the photos of children taken
in the devastated town of Kuito
(Continued on page 8)
s map 
n fin i t y

A child’s map
“The dogs devour dead bodies, the living eat the dogs,” wrote T h e
I n d e p e n d e n t’s special correspondent from Kuito during the nine-
month conflict that pitted the National Union for the Total Liberation of
Angola (UN I TA) against government forces in 1993-1994. Since the country’s
independence from Portugal in 1975,the two camps have been at war, but
this time, they fought on either side of Kuito’s main street. The fighting and
p r i vations left 40,000 dead.To date, the Angolan conflict has cost close to one
million lives.
“At the height of the Bosnian war, my eyes, like many others, were fixed on
S a r a j e v o ’s agony,while at the same time, another city was on its knees,” w r o t e
French writer Bernard-Henri Lévy, who visited the city in 2001 for the Fr e n c h
newspaper Le Monde. Located at the heart of Angola’s main plain, Kuito is
the most devastated city in Africa. Following the breakdown of the 1994
Lusaka peace agreement, fighting resumed in December 1998.Since then,
UNITA has been upholding a state of insecurity around Kuito. The city, only
reachable via armed convoy, is in “a desperate situation,” according to its
bishop, Dom Jose Nambi.
It counts about 240,000 inhabitants of which close to half are displaced. L i ke
a quarter of Angola’s population, war has forced them to flee their homes.
The city has no running water or electrical network.
Close to one child in two dies before reaching the age of five. Apart from a
tiny minority profiting from the diamond trade, the majority of Ku i t o ’s
inhabitants survive through a bit of farming around the city and a host of “ o d d
jobs.”
The displaced are almost entirely reliant on the World Food Programme. But
for financial reasons, the latter has just been obliged to limit its aid to the
“vulnerable groups,” such as pregnant women and very young children.
A CITY ON ITS KNEES

“Children’s laughter fills the silence, as if the soul of the rain had risen and was beckoning the rivers
to return and tempt wheat, maize and manioc from the earth.”

A child’s map
“The voices of adults,slow an
Children in their white Sunday best walk the city from north
to south.
One thing is certain:here in Kuito, children push the world
onwards to infinity. ■
“The two-times table.”
“Children slide along this map with little speed cars made of tin cans.”
This is the map of a war:territories, frontiers and sprawling
craters are inscribed in black and white—it is the map of a new
w o r l d . Children slide along this map with little speed cars made
of tin cans, their bodies puffed by the wind,navigating the world
to its farthest limits.
They tell each other the tales of the great chiefs, heard from
elders sitting around water pipes and fires lit on the edge of night.
“Once upon a time there was a man,his wife and a snake,” or
“Once upon a time, there was a girl who asked many questions,”
or “Once upon a time, there was a magic box that should have
been hidden.”
(Continued from page 5)

One thing is certain: here in Kuito, children push the world
onwards to infinity
and unstinting as the afternoon, gather letters of the alphabet and dreams to teach the children…”

A child’s map
Beyond the doors of houses, the children are exploring
the labyrinthine walls
“A sense of eternity lies in each window turned toward the light, the sun glides in through blankets of pollen settling on the ground.”
Born in 1952,Ana Paula Tavares specializes in African lusophone
l i t e r a t u r e,w h i ch she teaches at the Catholic University of Lisbon.
Po e t r y : Ritos de passagem (“Rites of passage”) published by
the Union of Angolan Writers (1985); O lago da lua (“The lake
of the moon”), published by Editorial Caminho, Lisbon,1989;
Dizes-me coisas amargas como os frutos ( “ Tell me of bitter
things like fruit”), same editor 2001. In prose: O sangue da
b u g a n v i l i a (“The blood of the bougainvillea”), Cape Ve rd e
Portuguese Cultural Centre, 1997.
Ana Paula Ta v a r e s ’s poetry also appears in an anthology co-
edited by UNESCO and Acte Sud, Poésie d’Afrique au Sud du
Sahara,1945-1995.

“They have a key for everything—even to the stairs that they climb up to reach the sky, bared by a missing roof.”
“Every wall is a mountain,and the higher one climbs,the farther one sees into the future.”
