SOS Media
On
24 January this year, just weeks after
the Taleban lost their 7-year hold on
power, the Kabul Weekly, Afghanistan’s first
independent publication in as many years, hit
the streets. This momentous and highly
symbolic event was made possible by direct
assistance provided by UNESCO as part of a
global programme to support the development
of editorially independent and non-partisan
media in areas ravaged by conflict (see box).
The 10-year-old programme, known as SOS
Media, has achieved impressive results in
Southeastern Europe, Africa and Asia.
As the media became instruments of war in
the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s,
UNESCO sought to support non-partisan
reporting. To this end, it provided print and
broadcast journalists with equipment and
supplies, helped them communicate across lines
of fire and organize distribution. With the
World Association of Newspapers, the
International Federation of Journalists and the
Council of Europe, UNESCO helped set up the
Independent Balkan Media Coordination Centre
in Slovenia to keep track of press freedom
violations in the former Yugoslavia. Diplomatic
pressure to prevent regimes from suppressing
the nascent independent media in the region
helped the development of lively print and
broadcast media which played a crucial role in
the defeat of President Slobodan Milosevic in
the elections of 2000.
Throughout the preceding years of conflict,
UNESCO in cooperation with various NGOs
UNESCO supports independent media in conflict and post conflict areas,
to provide the non-partisan information that is vital for reconciliation, reconstruction
and democracy

helped to keep independent media alive in the
former Yugoslavia (see box ) often moving key
equipment and supplies across battle-lines. In
1995, together with World Wide Television
News (WTN), UNESCO helped to create a
Satellite News Exchange which continued to
make reliable information available to
independent television broadcasters throughout
the subsequent war years. UNESCO also
supported the creation of an Association of
Private Media (APM) which helped independent
publishers to coordinate their responses in the
face of restrictions and government-induced
shortages of material such as paper. The private
Trans Press network laboured, with UNESCO
assistance, to distribute independent
newspapers as widely as possible in a difficult
environment.
In the summer of 2002, UNESCO sent Nastasa
Vuckovic Lesendric, General Manager of APM
and of the Trans Press network in Belgrade, to
Afghanistan. Her role was to share her
considerable experience with media
professionals of that other war-ravaged country. 
PRESSURE FROM ALL SIDES
Back from her mission, Vuckovic Lesendric
outlined the challenges facing the Afghan print
media: “In just a few months, 90 different titles
were established but none are economically
viable. They must first establish the habit of
reading newspapers, which is difficult because
of very low literacy. I was shocked when one
Afghan man told me ‘I was born to be a warrior
and all I need to read is the Koran which I
already know by heart.’ Printing presses were
destroyed in the wars and there is the problem
of distribution. It is really difficult to travel
beyond Kabul, some areas are not secure and
distribution there will depend on the
cooperation of warlords who can put pressure
on publishers in terms of contents.”
Since 1994, SOS Media has been active in the
Great Lakes region of Africa. With the non-
governmental organization Reporters sans
frontières, it set up Agatashya, a radio station in
Rwanda run by independent Rwandan
journalists. It broadcast survival information on
drinking water, food and sanitation to more
than 1.5 million refugees and helped them
search for lost family members. UNESCO and
the French NGO Equilibre furthermore sent
some 3,500 radio sets to camps in the Kivu
Lake area (former Zaïre). This illustrates the
reliance of large-scale humanitarian assistance
on the media and “it is essential that the
populations concerned be able to trust the
media which disseminate vital public
service messages,” says Antonella Notari,
spokesperson for the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
UNESCO emphasized training a new

Humanitarian
organizations use
local media to
transmit vital
information to
refugees, as in
Macedonia (left).
In Chad (bottom left),
a journalist
interviews a farmer
for the community
radio


Press Houses in both countries. They provide
independent journalists with infrastructure (i.e.
computers, documentation and newspaper
production facilities) and help them meet,
exchange views and experiences. The Press
Houses have also given Hutu and Tutsi
journalists an opportunity to work together.
In Rwanda, UNESCO is funding the production
generation of journalists, after the 1994
genocide in Rwanda. One hundred and ten
media professionals were trained in Rwanda
between 1997 and 2000, and the programme
continues. UNESCO has been encouraging the
exchange of news, and providing material help.
It helped increase the number of independent
newspapers in Burundi and Rwanda and set up

and broadcast of a daily radio programme on
women’s issues by the Association Rwandaise
Femmes et Médias (Association of Women
Journalists). Aid was offered to ten independent
media outlets in Rwanda while, in Burundi,
support was given to newspapers and
associations promoting press freedom and
human rights. Working with the NGO Reporters
sans frontières, UNESCO helped the Burundian
publications La Semaine, Panafrika and Ijwi
(The Voice) survive and increase circulation. In
both countries, UNESCO supported the creation
of new press associations to replace those that
disappeared in the violence.
In Angola, SOS Media has provided training
to 80 radio journalists, including 27 women,
since 1998 and helped them produce
programmes on subjects such as
unemployment, street children, health and
women’s issues. These programmes, broadcast
by UN Radio and state broadcasters, are
produced with a view to laying the ground for
the creation of independent radio stations.
Similarly, UNESCO is seeking to revive
dialogue between Israeli and Palestinian media
professionals on issues of common concern,
encourage professional exchanges and improve
professional standards. Such meetings,
organized by the Israeli/Palestinian Media
Forum, which UNESCO helped establish in
1998, stalled when the second Intefada flared
up two years ago. Plans exist also to produce
television programmes to be aired in both the
Palestinian territories and Israel.
Roni Amelan
Working the mixer at
a radio Hargeisa, in
Somaliland (top).
Participants in a live
broadcast  on radio
Vive le paysan in
Burkina Faso debate
the links between
football and sorcery
