Cubes and spheres
The
Earth Institute at
Columbia University
(USA) and UNESCO
have teamed up in a new project to assist
local communities around the globe to
adapt to rapid environmental and social
change. Called CUBES (Columbia Earth
Institute/UNESCO Joint Programme on
Biosphere and Society), it will focus on
five key issues: water, energy, health,
agriculture, and biodiversity.
In one of the CUBES projects, the
practices of pastoral Masaï herdsmen from
the grassland plains of Kenya will be
compared with those of ranchers from the
borderlands of Arizona and New Mexico
in the USA. Like many of their American
counterparts, the Masaï are slowly
abandoning their pastoral way of life and
turning to sedentary ranching. But there is
some evidence that when herders switch
to sedentary cattle farming, the local
grasslands cannot sustain the increase in
grazing intensity, while farmers abandon
their cultural traditions and drift to the
towns. Meanwhile, others blame pastoral
grazing for desertification, following the
destruction of forest and thicket.
CUBES is initially running five other
projects. In the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) the programme will work
with the UNESCO-sponsored Regional
Graduate School of Tropical Forestry at
the University of Kinshasa in a
“knowledge-networking” initiative on
malaria prevention, conservation and
reducing poverty. In another project, the
Tonle Sap Great Lake area (Cambodia), a
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, is the focus
of a strategy to reduce conflicts over
natural resources. The other sites for the
moment are the Amazon floodplain of
Peru, Cape Floral Kingdom Urban
ecosystem in Cape Town (South Africa)
and New York, where discussions are
continuing on developing the city as a
prototype urban biosphere reserve (see
New Courier, 4 May 2002).
Columbia set up its Earth Institute in
1996 with a palette of programmes geared
towards global sustainability. The aim
was to find a new way to practice science
for the benefit of both rich and poor, by
bringing scientific knowledge and
technology to bear on problems as diverse
as the impact of El Nino on Peruvian
anchovy fishermen and arsenic
contaminated water in Bangladesh. 
In May 2001 Columbia and UNESCO
jointly held an international conference in
New York on Biodiversity and Society that
paved the way for CUBES one year later.
The nine case studies presented at the
meeting looked at new forms of
partnership to resolve the conflicting
interests of stakeholders in fragile
environments, such as grasslands in
Chihuahua (Mexico) and tropical
mountains in Yunan (China). The meeting
also launched the controversial idea of
New York as an urban biosphere reserve. 
P.C.
