Quality and Quantity
Education for all means more than getting all children into school. It also
means giving them a quality education. New reports from UNESCO’s Institute
of Statistics show both goals are still distant in Latin America and Africa 
UNESCO and education Towards education for all
An estimated two million primary-age 
children and 20 million secondary-
age children in Latin America don’t attend
primary or secondary school according to
UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics (UIS). In the
region’s rural areas, two out of every five
children fail to finish primary school or are at
least two years behind when they finally do so.
This compares to one urban child in six.
The Institute’s report on Latin America and
the Caribbean1 examines the state of education
around the world. It presents figures for 19
countries gathered over the 1998 - 1999 school
year from national and other sources including
the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (ECLAC), and covers access
and participation of pupils and students from
early childhood to tertiary level in both public
and private education, teaching staff and
education expenditure. 
The report shows that although overall school
enrolment is improving in the region, countries
there are still a long way from ensuring that
their children succeed at school.
“Getting kids into school is one thing.
Keeping them there, and ensuring that they
learn something is another,” says Ken Ross, a
senior researcher at UNESCO’s International
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP). 
In all of the countries surveyed at least 80
percent of primary school-age children are
enrolled in primary education. However, the
report finds that only 54 percent of secondary
school-age youth are enrolled, leaving an
estimated 20 million “out-of-school” or still in
primary classes.
High drop out and repetition rates are the
norm in several countries. In Brazil, for
example, 24 percent of primary-school pupils
and 18 percent of secondary students are
repeaters. For every 100 children who enter
primary school in Nicaragua, only 55 reach
grade 5. Argentina has the highest “survival
rate”, with 94 percent of pupils reaching
grade 5.
Tertiary education is one of the region’s
“greatest educational challenges”, according
to the report. Despite increased enrolment
throughout the 90s, only 9.5 million people were
enrolled in tertiary education in Latin America
in 1998, with Brazil, Mexico and Argentina
alone accounting for almost 60 percent
of the total. 
Overall, the report states, Latin American
children spend less than nine years at school,
which is only one a half years more than
20 years ago. It is also well below the 12 years
judged by the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean as being “the
minimum amount of education necessary to earn
a wage that will make it possible to rise above
poverty in the course of a person’s active life.” 
The report doesn’t give any detailed
explanation of why kids are not making through
primary and secondary school in the region, but
highlights difficulties in implementing
institutional reforms and a continued
vulnerability to external events which has left
In Africa, the
question of quality is
still intrinsically
linked to access
1. Education
Statistics 2001,
Regional Report
on Latin
America and 
the Caribbean

Latin America’s economic performance fairly
weak.
The good news is that that despite the
varying levels of development across the region,
countries are committed to the modernization
and reform of their education systems. It also
notes that a real opportunity to improve is
emerging as population growth slows. Across
the region the population is increasing by
approximately 1.5 percent annually. This
means, says the report, that there will be a
smaller number of children to educate without
necessarily increasing education budgets.
AFRICA: AN UPHILL BATTLE
In Africa , the question of quality is still
intrinsically linked to access. According to the
UIS, four out of every ten primary–age children
in sub-Saharan Africa do not go to school, and
of those who do, only a small proportion reach
a basic level of skills. 
The Institute’s recent report, Education
Statistics 2001 – Regional Report on sub-Saharan
Africa, examines education in 49 countries and,
as with the Latin American report, covers the
1998 and 1999 school years. 
Data were provided by national authorities
responding to the annual education
questionnaire from the Institute, and
supplemented by figures from other
international bodies including the United
Nations Statistics and Population Divisions, and
the World Bank. 
It finds that pre-primary education is
extremely limited in the region, involving only
one child in ten, or some four million children.
The situation varies greatly from one country to
another, with Eastern and Southern Africa
accounting for 62 percent of these children. The
pre-primary institutions are largely private,
catering for more than eight children out of
every ten enrolled.  
Primary education is clearly the priority for
most of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa.
Yet, according to the report, only 60 percent of
primary-age children were actually enrolled
throughout the region in the survey years, but
that average hides big differences between
countries. In Niger, for example, only 26 percent
of primary-age children were in school,
School hours rarely take into 
account the need for extra hands 
at harvest time
The UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS)
was established in 1999 to improve UNESCO’s
statistical programme and to develop and deliver the
timely, accurate and policy-relevant statistics 
needed in today’s increasingly complex and rapidly
changing environment.
The statistical information gathered by the UIS 
not only helps interpret and report on global
developments in education, science, culture and
communication, it also helps countries to formulate,
implement and monitor policies and programmes 
in areas such as education and poverty reduction.
UIS is located on the campus of the University 
of Montreal in Montreal, Canada.
The two reports mentioned in the main article are
available in PDF format on the UIS website:
http://www.uis.unesco.org

outnumbering boys in secondary schools in
Botswana, Lesotho and Namibia.
All of the countries in the region, except St
Helena, Sao Tome and Principe and the
Seychelles, have at least one university.
However, tertiary education remains “marginal”
with only about one and a half million students
enrolled in these institutions (these figures
exclude Nigeria). The report signals that many
students – particularly those in advanced
research – have to study abroad because
programmes are not available in their home
countries. Within the region, a majority of
tertiary students choose to study education and
social sciences (including humanities).
“MARGINAL”
Overall, there is an average of 40 pupils per
teacher across the region, but again the
situation varies considerably from country to
country. In St Helena, the ratio is nine pupils
for every teacher, but in Mozambique, Uganda,
Chad, Mali and Congo it is more than 60 to one.
“It should be stressed,” says the report, “that
national mean figures of 60 pupils or more per
teacher in fact mean these countries may have
some teachers in charge of 100 pupils of more.”
compared to 93 percent in Mauritius.
Based on these figures, the report estimates
that some 38-million primary-age children were
out-of-school in sub-Saharan Africa in 1998,
about 60 percent of them in the countries of
Central and Western Africa.
The data also indicates a “relatively high”
level of repetition in the region, with an average
of 17 percent of pupils repeating a year. 
Secondary education, says the report, “is still
not widespread in sub-Saharan Africa,” and
complete data are not available for all countries
in the region. Late entry and high repetition
rates also mean that, in many countries, the
majority of secondary-age children are still
attending primary classes. In the 21 countries for
which data were available, an average of only 19
percent of young people of secondary-school-age
were enrolled at that level. In five countries
(Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea, Mozambique and
Niger) it was less than ten percent. 
Many more boys than girls are enrolled in
secondary schools across the region. In
countries such as Benin, Chad, Guinea-Bissau
and Togo, more than twice as many boys as
girls attend secondary classes. There are
however exceptions to this pattern with girls
Poverty, HIV-AIDS
and high population
growth are
preventing millions
of African children
from going to
school…

Teachers throughout the region are generally
poorly trained with considerable variation
between countries. For the 16 countries, which
provided figures on pre-primary education, an
average of only 30 percent of teachers received
any training. The situation is somewhat better
in primary education, but again extremely
variable. Equatorial Guinea claims that 100
percent of primary teachers there have received
some training. In Guinea Bissau only 28 percent
have. In half of the 26 countries for which data
were available, 20 percent of primary teachers
had not received any training at all. 
Total spending on education ranges from one
percent of GDP in Sierra Leone to over ten
percent in Zimbabwe (10.1) and Lesotho (13.2).
Most of the money goes towards current
expenditure, including teachers’ salaries and the
purchase of materials, and the lion’s share is
devoted to primary education.
The educational challenges facing the
countries of sub-Saharan Africa are
considerable. Poverty, HIV-AIDS (see box), war
and civil conflicts and high population growth
are major hurdles for all governments and
populations throughout the region. One person
in three is of primary or secondary school age
compared to only one in five in Latin America
and Asia and one in six in OECD countries. “A
sustained and substantial increase in GDP
growth rates would seem to be an important
precondition for improving access to
education,” concludes the report.
To make a difference, the report suggests that
governments need to recognize the crucial role
of education in development; enhance the
capacities of institutions and education
personnel; and extend access and increase
equity while improving the quality and
relevance of education.
COMMITMENTS
Most of the world’s governments, development
agencies and donor organizations now accept
that education is a key factor in determining a
person’s quality of life, as well as productivity,
employability and national development . At the
World Education Forum held in Dakar, Senegal,
two years ago, 164 countries committed
themselves to achieving quality basic education
for all by 2015 or earlier. For their part, donor
countries pledged “no country seriously
committed to basic education will be thwarted
in the achievement of this goal by lack of
resources”.
Two years down the track, many countries are
obviously struggling. According to a monitoring
report released late last year on Education For
All, at least 32 nations may not even be able to
meet the basic goal of enrolling all children in
primary schools by 2015, let alone make sure
that they at least get a minimum and
meaningful education. 
Sue Williams
Getting a clear picture
In 1995, UNESCO’s International Institute for Educational
Planning (IIEP) and the education ministries of southern
African countries launched a major project to monitor
education quality in the region with a view to improving it.
The  first phase of the Southern Africa Consortium for
Monitoring Educational Quality (SACMEQ) project focused on
assessing the conditions of schooling - looking at the
infrastructure, numbers of teachers and availability of
teaching materials for example. SACMAQ II includes an
assessment of the performance levels of students and their
teachers in literacy and mathematics. Some 50,000 students,
5,000 teachers and 2,500 school principals from primary
schools across 15 southern African countries were involved in
data collection for the project. Results are expected out late
this year or early in 2003. 
… and those who make it into class 
often have to share a teacher with more
than 60 other classmates
