Angkor’s role in the
search for a lost unity
“When I pray here, my spirit flies up to
heaven and I see Buddha,” says
78-year-old Heanj Tan, as she valiantly climbs
down the perilous stone steps of Bayon, the main
temple of Angkor Thom. This elderly woman,
illiterate and with failing eyesight, seems happy to
be detached from the Earth, where she has seen so
much death. All her family disappeared, some of
them massacred “under Pol Pot’s regime”
(1975–1979). She survived and prayed often in the
pagoda of Kompong Chnang until one day Angkor
Wat appeared to her in a dream.
“It was two years ago,” she says. “I saw the wat
(pagoda in Khmer) very clearly, in my eyes and in
my heart, and I came here.” 
Heanj Tan’s devotion is not necessarily shared by
all the Cambodians who flock to Angkor with the
foreign tourists. Alongside a large number of
monks, we came across a waitress who had come
from Phnom Penh “just to visit”, or a young lawyer
who came because he is proud of his culture. And
there was also the father of an affluent family, who
was conscious that a visit to Angkor is a external
sign of social prestige. The number of Cambodian
visitors exceeded 120,000 in 2000 and is rising
every year.
Why do so many people visit Angkor? The return
of peace in 1998 and the demining of the site, has
allowed Cambodians to travel there in safety. But in
a country which is struggling to cast off decades of
nightmares and humiliation – civil war, genocide,
Vietnamese occupation – the memory of Angkor
soothes a shattered nation.
Heanj Tan, 78, travelled
to Angkor after seeing
the temple in her dreams

“The last 25 years have been a period of
intense philosophical reflection for the
Cambodians,” says Azzedine Beschaouch,
UNESCO’S Scientific Advisor for Angkor. “They
have asked themselves whether the decline of
the Angkor empire (9th to the 14th century)
signalled the end of a Cambodia that was
peaceful and highly cultured, and whether they
themselves were part of another Cambodia, one
which is destructive and barbaric. Angkor above
all allows them to be reconciled with their own
history: aligning themselves to this great
civilisation allows them to draw a line under
the barbaric times.”
“Angkor is the soul of the Khmer,” adds Ang
Chouléan, an anthropologist and the director of
culture at APSARA, the national agency in
charge of the site’s development (see box).
“In times of despair, Angkor is the only
reference point.”
It is a religious symbol, the mythical base of
the “Khmer nation” and therefore a national
emblem. Since independence in 1953, Angkor
Wat has featured on Cambodia’s national flag. 
Ang Chouléan recalls that in 1991, when the
four warring parties created the Supreme
National Council in order to reunite the country,
“the first thing that the Council did was to
appeal to the international community to
safeguard Angkor.”
In December 1992, the site was inscribed on
UNESCO’s World Heritage List, an act Ang
Chouléan says sealed “the start of the process
of national reconciliation”. Since then, Angkor
has loomed large whenever peace in the
country needed propping up. In 1993, when
King Norodom Sihanouk returned to the throne,
the first decree he signed – NS 001 – regulated
the protection of the archaeological site.
American anthropologist Ashley Thompson
underlines that after the events of July 1997 as
Cambodia once again tottered on the brink of
chaos, it was to Angkor that the king turned to
“pay homage to the statues” and to appeal for
reconciliation.
However, the control of the former capital and
the tourist boom that it has led, have given rise
to dissent in some quarters.
“On one hand, Angkor has shown
Cambodians that they can earn a lot of money
by working together but, on the other hand, it
has caused numerous tensions,” says Tamara
Teneishvili from UNESCO’s Bureau in Phnom
Penh.
Property developers are holding up the
introduction of town planning rules designed to
protect the area around the site and the
neighbouring town of Siem Reap, which has
almost doubled in size in 10 years. And the
residents of the 75 villages in the archeological
park, and the long-term residents of Siem Reap
have see more and more people moving into the
region from other provinces to get a share of the
profits.
The gold mine generated by ticket sales for
Angkor is also a source of bitter dispute. The
number of foreign visitors has increased greatly
since 1998 (see graph), pushing ticket receipts
beyond US$5 million dollars in 2000, compared
Angkor is a symbol of national unity but also an example
of “international solidarity”, says Etienne Clément, the
director of UNESCO’s Bureau in Phnom Penh. “Angkor has
benefited from the sort of international cooperation which
is unique in the history of heritage conservation,” he says.
Since the site was inscribed on the World Heritage List ten
years ago, UNESCO has taken over the office of secretary
of the International Coordination Committee charged with
safeguarding and developing the site. This committee,
made up of 35 states and international organizations, is
jointly presided over by France and Japan, the two biggest
contributors to efforts to safeguard the site. Every year, the
committee supervises around 100 projects, worth a total of
five million dollars, covering research, restoration, training,
community development and tourism.
After helping the Cambodian authorities to define the
layout of a site of more than 400km2, UNESCO encouraged
the creation of APSARA in 1995. This Authority for the
Protection of the Site and the management of the region of
Angkor, whose acronym refers to the renowned celestial
dancers which are engraved in stone there, has set up a
range of projects, mainly related to tourism, town planning
and the maintenance of the monuments.
Thousands of
Cambodians travel to
Angkor Wat to pray.
According to legend,
the Wat is an earthly
replica of the stables
of a celestial palace.
During the Khmer
New Year, up to
15,000 people visit
the site 

The wanton pillage
of Angkor has been
much reduced
thanks to the efforts
of the Heritage
Police, set up in 1994
with UNESCO’s help
with US$1.8 million in 1999. Since April 1999, a
private company, Sokha Hotels, has held the
concession to sell tickets. It takes a cut of
almost 40 percent of the proceeds. The rest goes
to the Public Treasury, which is supposed to
pay it back to APSARA, the tourism ministry
and the culture ministry. The agreement has
already been revised once and a new review
will take place this year.
“All the donors who have contributed to the
development and protection of the site,
regularly denounce the situation,” says Etienne
Clément, the director of UNESCO’s Bureau in
Phnom Penh. He points out that elsewhere in
the world, companies running the ticket
operations for public monuments are rarely
allowed to keep more than 15 percent of the
receipts. But to place the situation in context,
he observes that prior to April 1999, “all the
money disappeared into a black hole”.
“In Cambodia, the tradition of transparency in
public finances is a very recent thing,” says
Etienne Clément, choosing his words carefully.
“Why don’t we let APSARA collect the ticket
receipts?” says Son Soubert, an archaeologist
and a member of the Constitutional Council.
“Because, as everyone knows,” he alleges
“Sokha finances the Prime Minister’s party.”
He says the situation is all the more serious
because the culture ministry lacks the necessary
resources to fight against the pillaging of
archaeological sites. The theft and the
trafficking of the heads of statues and bas-reliefs
continue in a number of provinces, even though
these practices have been stopped in the Angkor
park, thanks to tourism and the Heritage Police,
which was set up in 1994 with UNESCO’s
support.
The Angkor temples, representing the cosmos
and the order of gods, have always symbolised
the aspiration for unity and harmony,” says
Ashley Thompson. The Cambodians like them
so much because they represent the possibility
of transcending the divisions of history and the
failings of humanity.
Sophie Boukhari
