A profession
in crisis
Relentless population growth and
declining working conditions are creating
a severe shortage of teachers in the
world’s classrooms, which may lead
to a slide in educational standards
according to a new global survey of
teaching conditions 
“Teaching? Out of the question.” For
Jerome Damien, a 27-year-old Parisian “teaching is too hard.
Teachers are expected to fill roles fhey are not trained for.
It’s also a profession with limited career possibilities, and
early burn-out. And the pay is lousy given the job’s
demands.” Jerome’s attitude is shared by 16 year-old
Franco-Australian student Raphaëlle Prikosh who would
“never, never” consider becoming a teacher. “Have you seen
how kids and parents treat teachers these days?” she adds.
The attitudes of Jerome and Raphaëlle are shared by
growing numbers of young people in the rich North, who’re
seeking more lucrative, exciting jobs, and consider teaching
as a profession of last resort.
In the developing countries of the South, the reasons are
different, but the teaching profession is equally in trouble.

Doing two jobs at
once in Congo,
where there are
some 70 primary-age
children for every
teacher in the
country and
classrooms of up to
100 pupils
classrooms with as many as 100 students per teacher in
some developing countries. 
At the same time, the survey showed that in industrialized
countries, an aging teaching force and a dearth of new
recruits discouraged by declining status and low pay
threatens to diminish the quality of education, just at a time
when the need for new knowledge and skills is growing
dramatically. 
The number of women teachers increased throughout the
1990s, but still remains well under 50 percent of the total in
many countries in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia,
where the presence of more women teachers could help
increase the access of girls to schooling. The report notes
that the “glass ceiling” remains a reality for women in the
profession who’re still seriously under-represented in
management jobs.
The Statistical Profile of the Teaching Profession, looks at
how many teachers there are, who they are and what
training they have received, their working conditions and
how much their governments invest in them. It clearly links
the status of teachers with the quality of education: in those
countries where teachers enjoy relatively good employment
conditions, education tends to be given high priority and is
of higher quality. 
The data, drawn from a range of sources, show that a
concerted effort has been made in many developing regions
where two thirds of the world’s 59 million teachers live and
work. The number of primary teachers in these countries
increased by almost nine percent between 1990 and 1995.
But the population of primary school age children there rose
by the same amount.
At secondary level, the number of teachers grew
substantially faster than the secondary school age
population in developing countries (14.3 percent and
6.0 percent respectively). In the Least Developed Countries
(LDCs) the difference was much less marked (16.4 percent
and 13.9 percent). However, the study notes that almost half
(228 million) of the total youth population of secondary
school age in these countries is out of school. As more of
these young people get into school, demand for teachers
will increase dramatically. 
Young people are still becoming teachers, but the number of
new recruits to the job cannot keep up with population
growth, and, especially in Africa, the profession is being
decimated by AIDS and conflict. 
Unless something is done quickly to turn the situation
around, say the experts, the world will have to deal with an
acute teacher shortage at a time when demand for
education is growing exponentially.
Such are the conclusions of a survey published by
UNESCO and the International Labour Office, released on
October 5 (World Teachers’ Day). Based on the most
extensive set of data ever gathered on the teaching
profession, the survey found that the growth in the number
of school-aged children had outpaced the growth in the
number of teachers worldwide in the 1990s, packing
* “A Statistical Profile of the Teaching Profession”, by Maria Teresa
Siniscalco, UNESCO/ILO, 2002. The report draws on information
from various sources including the European Network for
Information in Education (Eurydice), the International Labour Office
(ILO) the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), UNESCO’s International Bureau of Education and its
Institute for Statistics. This latter is monitoring teacher shortages
globally and will release a detailed report on this issue early in 2003.

Such growth means that the ratio of pupils to teachers
remains three times higher in the LDCs than in developed
countries.  In Benin, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo,
Gabon, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique and Senegal, for
example, the study reports more than 50 primary-age
children and often as many as 70 for every teacher in the
overall population. This compares with an average of
16 pupils for every teacher in developed countries. 
Developing country teachers also tend to be very young
and inexperienced. In many of these nations more than
30 percent of teachers are under 30 years of age: in
Indonesia, the under 30s account for more than 52 percent of
primary school teachers. Although most teachers have the
national academic qualifications to do their job, these
qualifications vary widely, and in many of the LDCs the
majority of primary teachers have, at most, a lower secondary
qualification, and frequently no professional training at all.
This is the case for almost 50 percent of teachers in Uganda,
40 percent in Togo and some 35 percent in Cape Verde.
The rich countries are also facing a difficult future.
Although there seem to be plenty of teachers, the majority of
them are older. In Germany and Sweden for example, more
than 70 percent of primary teachers are over 40. This means
that the majority of teachers in developed countries received
their initial training 15 to 20 years ago, but the knowledge
and skills needed by students has changed dramatically since

then. The report notes that
in-service training is offered
in many countries, but
questions its quality and
relevance.
Research indicates that low salaries may be partly
responsible for lack of new recruits: teachers with 15 years
experience in the OECD countries for example, earn an
average of US$27,525 annually, or significantly less than
equally qualified professionals in other fields.  This is still
several times the earnings of teachers in developing
countries, where salaries fell steadily throughout the 1990s.
In Peru, all teachers, regardless of the level they teach or
their experience, earn little more than US$4,700 a year.
The report analyses the trade-offs made by governments to
maximize the efficiency of their education systems. In some
countries, such as Peru, teachers’ low salaries are partly
compensated by a relatively light teaching load of about 648
hours annually. In the Philippines, teachers are paid more
(about $US10,640 annually), but work an average of 1,176
hours per year and teach classes of over 50 students.
Juggling these various elements is obviously a complex
task, especially for poor countries. But getting the balance
right is vital for building and maintaining a professional
teaching corps.
Sue Williams
Angry teachers in
the United States

25
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2002
Education for all cannot be achieved in
countries like burkina Faso (above) without
more, trained, teachers
© L.Franey/Rapho, Paris
