A
h
 
Privatizing the tap 
uman rights 
and profit 
Access to water is at the same 
time a basic need, a fundamental 
right and a potentially lucrative 
market. Hence a debate about the 
need to regulate the industry 
“The test of our progress is not whether we 
add more to the abundance of those who have much; 
it is whether we provide enough for those who 
have little.” 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

THE Me Rass ey 
cording to one view, a few 
multinational corporations backed 
by the World Bank are aggressively 
taking over the world’s water supplies. 
Yet the reality today is that private companies are 
still involved in a relatively limited way in the water 
© 
Fr
an
go
is
 
Lo
ch
on
/G
am
ma
, 
Pa
ri
s 
sector, despite the huge potential for expansion. 
International corporations contribute less than 
15 percent to the global cost of financing water and 
sanitation projects, about the same as international 
aid donors. 
Compared with other types of infrastructure “the 
water sector has been the least attractive to private 
investors,” according to the recent report of the 
World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure, 
chaired by Michel Camdessus, and the trend toward 
private investment has come to a virtual standstill, r 
foeus 
41 
largely as a result of the crisis in Argentina. 
“We are starting to move away from the pure 
privatization paradigm in urban areas,” says Mark 

 Irrigation: How it's done 
in Madagascar (top), and 
in the drought-stricken 
fields on the California/ 
Oregon border in the 
United States 
W. Rosegrant, senior researcher at the International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). “A public 
system can be run equally as efficiently or better 
than a private system and it’s done all the time in 
the United States and in much of Europe. The issue 
is where you get the funding from, and how big 
cities can tap into capital markets.” 
However, private participation in the water > 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
P business is likely to expand quickly if services are 
brought under world trade rules, and much of the 
noise about privatization comes not so much from 
the developing countries as from the United States, 
whose municipally run water systems would risk 
takeover by foreign corporations. 
Few issues stir such passionate debate as the 
commercialization of water services — of making 
people pay sometimes far more than they can afford 
for one of the essentials of life. Many consider it 
wrong to allow private corporations, whose primary 
obligation is toward their shareholders rather than 
the common good, to profit from a basic human 
need. 
Islamic societies consider water is a God-given 
good, which Joachim von Braun, director-general 
of IFPRI, says “makes it so difficult to introduce 
efficiency and cost recovery.” 
“In some countries,” he says, “the words ‘water 
price’ are forbidden. In Egypt, until fairly recently, 
these were words not to be used in government 
reports.” 
The UN now says explicitly that access to safe 
water is a fundamental human right, and most 
people doubtlessly see it that way. But does a right 
have to be free? Ismail Serageldin, chairman of the 
World Commission on Water for the 21st Century, 
has pointed out that food is also a human right, but 
few argue that food should be provided for nothing. 
In fact the subsidizing of water may be one of 
the reasons it is becoming so scarce in parts of 
the world, because unless people value something 
properly, they tend to waste it. Some experts say 
a sharper distinction should be made between 
water for drinking and hygiene and water used in 
 
© Chris de Bode/Panos Pictures, London 
agriculture and industry, over 90 percent of the total. 
The member States of the United Nations have 
committed themselves to halving the proportion 
of people without access to safe water or basic 
sanitation within the next 12 years, a daunting 
if not fanciful target that will require hundreds 
of billions of dollars of new investments on top 
of the money needed to maintain and repair the 
crumbling infrastructure of existing water systems. 
But water aid has declined in recent years and in 
any case does not go to the countries that most 
need it. Neither does private investment. The 2002 
Human Development Report of the UN Development 
Programme lists 60 countries in which more than 
one fifth of the population, sometimes substantially 
more than a fifth, has no access even to a public tap 
or safe well. Many of these are places in which no 
company in its right mind would consider investing. 
SECTOR CALLED DISASTROUS 
According to the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
the least-developed countries, in which a very large 
proportion of the population lacks access to safe 
water, receive only a small part, about 12 percent, 
of foreign aid in the water sector. About half of the 
aid goes to relatively advanced countries, including 
Egypt, Mexico, Malaysia, China and India. 
“It is impossible,” says the Camdessus report, 
“to escape the conclusion that the global water 
sector in its many forms is in disastrous condition. 
Water is not being sufficiently developed and 
conserved. Physical infrastructure is lagging behind 
need. Sector management is deficient, services are 
deteriorating and deficits growing. Allied to this is a

Looking over 
the construction 
site of the 
Three Gorges 
Dam on the 
Yangtse River, 
near Yichang in 
China 
“Private 
participation 
can take 
many forms.” 
shortage of financial services going into the sector. 
Indeed, the financial situation has been getting 
worse in the last few years, and the sector shows no 
sign of generating the funds to meet future service 
standards.” 
Given this situation, it is understandable that 
governments and international lending organizations 
see private companies, with their access both to 
expertise and to capital markets and their ability 
to transcend national boundaries, as part of the 
mix. The World Bank has made private sector 
involvement a condition for many of its loans. But 
this largely reflects frustration with the inability of 
public bodies to do the job and the realization by all 
lending institutions, including private banks, that 
the success of virtually all industrial and agricultural 
investments depend on the certainty of a safe supply 
of water. 
However, the water sector is rife with corruption, 
and as the Camdessus report points out, many 
irrigation agencies and water departments are 
“grossly over-manned, in a misguided attempt to 
create employment.” 
In its latest State of the World Report, the 
Worldwatch Institute says that following last year’s 
World Summit on Sustainable Development in 
Johannesburg, “it seems more likely that sustainable 
economic growth will emerge from the combined 
efforts of businesses, citizens’ groups and local 
governments.” 
The industry, as represented by the World 
Business Council for Sustainable Development, says 
it is ready for talks with all the parties involved “to 
find areas of agreement and test the application of 
these ideas on the ground.” At the moment, it says 
 
Cleaning the drains 
of Port-au-Prince in 
Haiti 
- in an example of the management jargon and lack 
of transparency that makes many people so wary 
of the corporations - it is “scoping” the problems, 
but soon it will build “partnerships of the willing 
and the able” through “multi-stakeholder dialogues” 
and “create a roadmap on how to create appropriate 
local governance.” 
Private participation can take many forms, 
including financial arrangements among 
corporations, governments and local authorities to 
achieve development where development aid has 
failed. In Britain, water utilities are fully owned 
by private corporations. In France, corporations 
run utilities under long-term concessions. Many 
municipalities prefer to retain full ownership and 
control, but bring in private companies to manage 
water supplies for a fee. 
“Whether water services are provided by the 
public or private sector (or both), it is important 
that social and environmental objectives continue 
to be met,” according to a new OECD study, which pp 

  
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
D> says that poor consumers “should not have to pay 
a disproportionately larger part of their disposable 
income for water services than better-off water 
consumers do.” 
It is increasingly apparent that the success of 
any water project depends on the participation 
of citizens. “Local communities must be actively 
involved in decisions about the trade-offs between 
standards, cost and affordability,” says a report 
on funding the Johannesburg targets written by 
Cambridge Economic Policy Associates. 
For Mr. Von Braun of IFPRI, “the answer to water 
pricing is efficient institutions of user associations 
that can negotiate with higher-level bodies. 
“What is driving demand for drinking water is 
not so much price, but the capacity to politically 
articulate,” he adds. “In some parts of the world 
the poor have become more articulate through 
decentralisation, devolution and more democracy, 
and what is on the top of their agenda as citizens is 
clean water and, as farmers, access to irrigation.” 
The world is full of places where large dam and 
infrastructure projects have displaced populations, 
where the concept of water markets has been 
© Caroline Penn/Panos Pictures, London 
introduced against the will of the people and 
where sites of cultural or religious importance 
have been destroyed. All this points to the need to 
involve the civil population and non-governmental 
organizations in the planning process. 
Lack of public participation is at the root of 
the dissatisfaction with many of the private deals 
and public-private partnerships in the water 
business. If the companies are often seen as remote 
and arrogant, they have often brought it upon 
themselves by signing opaque deals with corrupt 
or undemocratic governments, by spending huge 
sums on lobbying, lavishing grotesque salaries on 
their executives, cutting standards, promising more 
than they could deliver, hiking charges beyond the 
level that poor people could afford to pay and by 
laying off workers. The 1999 Gallup International 
Millennium Survey showed enormous suspicion of 
corporate conduct and scorn about the companies’ 
perceived lack of social responsibility. 
“Corporate donations and lobbies often drown 
out the voices of workers, consumers, women, 
environmentalists and other interest and citizen 
groups,” the 2002 UNDP Human Development

Report says. Cases such as that of the privatization 
of the water supply in Cochabamba, Bolivia, which 
led to a general strike, riots and the imposition 
of martial law before the American-owned 
company was expelled, it adds, are examples of 
“how the concerns of local people, intellectuals, 
environmentalists and other groups are often 
ignored until they develop into protests and major 
confrontations.” 
Enron was investing heavily in the international 
water business until hidden debts forced its 
collapse. Vivendi, the French-owned largest player 
in the sector, which recently renamed its water 
and waste business Veolia Environment, has often 
seemed more preoccupied with its far-flung media 
and entertainment empire than the less glamorous 
business of delivering clean water to slums. 
CONTROLLING THE CORPORATIONS 
Some of the corporate failings are examined in detail 
in “The Water Barons,” a year-long investigation 
by the International Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists into the private water business. Sober 
reading though this is, the Camdessus report, 
without overlooking the problem of corruption, says 
that most private operations “have achieved real 
progress in efficiency and, when required by the 
authorities and as part of their contracts, affordably 
served poor suburbs.” These, of course, are the 
cases that do not make it into the headlines. 
The mistake seems to be in expecting capitalist 
corporations to act in anything other than a 
capitalist way. No matter how responsibly the 
companies conduct their business, it is up to 
public authorities to ensure that public services are 
provided to everyone on an equitable basis rather 
than on their ability to pay, and to ensure that 
natural resources are respected. 
That is why many of the organizations 
representing the interests of the developing world 
have called for the formal international regulation 
of trans-national corporations - an idea that was 
vigorously and successfully opposed by the business 
lobby at the Johannesburg summit meeting. It 
argued that self-regulation was sufficient. 
Nevertheless, the Camdessus report stresses the 
necessity for regulation at the national level, to keep 
water agencies at arms’ length from governments 
and make them accountable to the public. 
“Unfortunately,” it goes on, “there are very 
few examples of good, experienced regulators in 
the water sector in developing countries. Most 
are recent, weak and subject to government   
— e——— ——— 
Bele |     
    
Pore 
CLEAN DRINKING WATER 
AF 
RIFT VALLEY SPRINGS 
Left: Collecting 
   
 
© Trygve Bolstad/Panos Pictures, London 
water from a village 
tap in Tamil Nadu, interference, struggling to cope with the impact 
India of macro-economic events on major concessions. f 6oUs 
Above: A carton Where regulation is absent or weak, neither 
of bottled water companies, governments nor the general public 
leaves the factory in have confidence in the processes concerned, and 4 5 
Tanzania investment suffers.” 
Because regulators are so weak, conditions 
of injustice and inequality for which the private 
operators often get the blame, are allowed to 
perpetuate themselves. “In country after country,” 
notes the report by Cambridge Economic Policy 
Associates, “water services are provided to the 
better-off at deeply subsidized prices while the poor 
receive no service at all. Despite repeated urging by 
donors to raise tariffs on the better off - to generate 
additional resources that can be used to finance 
basic service access by the poor - this regressive 
situation remains in most developing countries.” 
The reason is obvious. The poor have no clout 
and the politicians who make decisions about 
charging are reluctant to raise prices or taxes on 
their more influential supporters. In fact, it is often 
the wealthier and more powerful, rather than the 
poor, who have been most adamantly opposed 
to private sector involvement, if this resulted in a 
weakening of their patronage. Ismail Serageldin says 
it was “perverse” to defend price subsidies in the 
name of the poor when they had no access to public 
services and had to buy water of dubious quality 
from street vendors at ten or 20 times the price they 
would have to pay if they were connected to the 
water system. 
Carrying water on trucks and on peoples’ backs is 
a very inefficient way of providing a water service, 
but in slum areas in the developing world that 
don’t have a hope of a connection to a piped water 
supply, it is the only way. Contrary to the common 
perception, the Asian Development Bank, in a 
study of small-scale private water providers in eight p> 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

foeus 
Pp cities, found these to be often family businesses, 
well integrated in the community, providing good 
services to the poor at competitive prices. 
Given the current slow expansion rate of water 
utilities, the study recommended legitimizing and 
improving the business environment for these 
providers to enable them to expand their capacity 
and offer lower tariffs. 
Anti-globalization campaigners fear that opening 
the market for water services at a time when water 
is becoming an increasingly scarce commodity will 
touch off the modern equivalent of a gold rush. 
They say it will be hoarded and shipped around the 
world as oil is today. 
If such an open bidding system for water comes 
to pass, the environment and the future will be the 
big losers, says Maude Barlow, a Canadian anti- 
globalization activist. In her book “Blue Gold,” she 
observes: 
“In all of this privatization, pricing debate, there is 
precious little said about the natural world and other 
species. That is because the environment is not 
factored in to the commercial equation. If we lose 
public control of our water systems, there will be 
no one left with the ability to claim this life-giving 
source for the earth.” 
Barry James 
