UNESCO’s 30-year-old Man 
and Biosphere 
(MAB) programme has always put both people 
and nature at the centre of its concerns. The 
original reserves aimed to reconcile conservation 
with the presence of people through a system of 
zoning, where a “buffer” zone and a “transition” 
area surrounded a “core” area with high 
conservation potential, shielding it from the 
destructive influence of a modernizing world. 
But, while the need for conservation is arguably 
greater today than it was when the first biosphere 
reserves were designated in 1976, the people 
who live in or near the reserves want to prosper 
economically. The challenge, then, is to square 
these potentially conflicting goals.
Over the past decade or so, the MAB 
programme has been developing a range of 
initiatives to do just this. One approach is to use 
an area’s cultural heritage as a money-earner, 
through ecotourism ventures. Some 70 biosphere 
reserves are also UNESCO World Heritage sites. 
In the past, local people have often been chased 
out of cultural sites in an effort to ‘preserve’ them. 
And, of course, tourism can be either supportive 
of or damaging to the conservation goals of 
a biosphere reserve, depending on how it is 
managed. “UNESCO is not introducing tourism,” 
says Francis Childe, senior programme specialist 
in the Division of Cultural Heritage, which works 
closely with the MAB programme. “But tourism is 
coming. So the question is how to make sure that 
local communities are involved and in control.”
One UNESCO-backed ecotourism project in 
mountainous regions of Central Asia and the 
Himalayas (see page 23) is working with local 
NGOs to develop home-stay accommodation, 
high-quality handcrafts, traditional games and 
festivals and to involve local communities in 
protecting cultural heritage sites. And managers 
of the Waterberg Biosphere Reserve in South 
Africa (see page 25) are using its resources to ease 
the legacy of apartheid and to narrow the divide 
between wealthy (white) game lodge owners or 



Conservation and development 
form a natural alliance in 
UNESCO’s biosphere reserves
Pulling down the fences
© UNESCO/Peter Coles

farmers and poor communities plagued by AIDS. 
Another recent initiative uses the sustainable 
practises of biosphere reserves as a guarantee of 
quality and fairness in local produce, whether 
handicrafts or food, through a system of quality 
labelling (see New Courier, October 2002, p.34).
Meanwhile, supporting the traditional 
knowledge and practices of local people can 
contribute to conservation, while encouraging 
cultural diversity. For example, indigenous 
peoples from Ghana and India to South America, 
traditionally designate special natural areas as 
sacred, restricting what can be done there. After 
countless generations, these areas have become 
havens of genetically ancient biodiversity, in 
landscapes that have been changed radically 
by human intervention. On a different tack, 
traditional practices that, to western minds, seem 
to be destructive can, in fact, be the opposite. In 
Australia’s Uluru-Kata Tjuta Biosphere Reserve, 
the Aboriginal custom of patchwork burning of 
the landscape is now part of the management 
plan. Controlled burning, it turns out, can be an 
excellent way to conserve biodiversity in arid 
areas. 
