focus
The floodgates open
At Ayany Primary School in a  Nairobi 
suburb, 120 pupils are huddled 
together in a classroom built for 40. 
Most are seated on the floor, their knees supporting 
exercise books, because there are not enough desks. 
The teacher, Jane Onyango, has no chalk to use 
on her splintered blackboard, so she is dictating 
science notes to her pupils. Like schools throughout 
the country, Ayany has been swamped since the 
new government dramatically fulfilled its election 
pledge to abolish school fees on January 7.
The road to Education for All is rocky and pitted 
with potholes, and nowhere more so than in sub-
Saharan Africa. Forty percent of the estimated 115.4 
million children out of school worldwide live in this 
region, the only one in which primary enrolment 
has actually fallen in the past ten years. 
Poverty caused by foreign debt repayments, 
poor investments, protracted civil wars, misplaced 
priorities, corruption and poor governance has 
resulted in a relentless decline in public spending on 
the school system. 
But there has been no loss of desire among the 
people for the benefits that literacy and wider 
learning can bring, as the new Kenyan government 
discovered on January 7, when almost 2.5m new 
pupils showed up for school. Primary enrolment 
shot up to 8.7m.  Schools that usually admitted 160 
pupils each year suddenly had to deal with more 
than 3,000 applicants.
At Olympic Primary School in Nairobi, where 
5,000 hopeful pupils turned up, riot police had to be 
called in to restore order when teachers told parents 
there was no more room.

“We have waited for this for too long and now we 
want our children in school,” said parent Japheth 
Mureithi.
Kenya has been through this chaos before. 
Education was declared free for children in 
standards one to four in 1974 and for the entire 
primary cycle in 1978. But in the mid-1980s the 
government reneged on the reforms, demanding 
that parents and communities contribute to their 
children’s schooling. Literacy levels have been 
slipping ever since.
With no guidelines in place, head-teachers were 
given a freehand to exploit parents at a time when 
jobs were being lost and agricultural output was 
falling. According to Daniel Sifuna, a professor of 
education at Kenyatta University, corrupt schools 
unilaterally started charging all sorts of levies, 
ranging from out of school activity to extra-
tuition fees. This time round school facilities, 
resources, equipment and teachers are again clearly 
overstretched. “We are aware that classrooms are 
inadequate and whenever possible, we shall make 
use of churches, mosques, social halls and tents,” 
said Raila Odinga, the minister of public works 
and housing and a leading member of the National 
Rainbow Coalition that promised free schooling. 
The government, which already spends 27 percent 
of its budget on education, estimates it will cost 
$140m a year – some officials say $200m – to cater 
for 7m pupils. This year the government could only 
afford to give $6.5m to schools.
The World Bank, International Monetary Fund 
and other multilateral donors had withdrawn 
support for the previous government in 1997 
because of its record on corruption.  But the Bank 
last month announced it will give $40m-$50m in 
June for education materials. But that still leaves a 
shortfall of up to $93.5m.
For now, ordinary parents are oblivious to the 
country’s predicament. “The government has 
abolished the building fund and activity fees and 
will pay for books, desks and chalk, and employ 
security guards for schools,” said a vegetable 
hawker in Nyeri, the home district of President 
Kibaki. “Now I will only have to buy the school 
uniform for my children and everything else will be 
taken care of by the government.” 
In neighbouring Uganda, the universal primary 
education drive, is being hailed as the most 
successful in sub-Saharan Africa, but it also 
demonstrates the enormity of the task at hand. 
Unlike Kenya, Uganda first rallied massive support 
from a consortium of agencies that include the 
World Bank, UNICEF, UNESCO, UNDP, African 
Development Bank, World Food Programme and the 
European Union.
Major donors include the government aid agencies 
of Austria, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, 
Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, the 
United Kingdom and the United States. To build 
up the country’s capacity to run its own education 
system, they agreed to operate within a single 
programme led by the government in consultation 
with them as part of a national strategy to eliminate 
poverty. 
When free education was announced for the first 
four children of every family in 1997, enrolment 
doubled from 2.9m to 5.8m. “We raised the 
enrolment rate of primary-aged children from 54 
percent in 1996 to 72 percent last year,” said Dr 
Khiddu Makubuya, minister of education and sports.
But the drive was hampered from the start by a 
gross shortage of adequate schools, most of which 
had been ravaged, through years of despotism or 
civil war under the governments of Idi Amin and 
Milton Obote
“Over two million children who had been selling 
mangoes and chasing birds in the countryside 
entered school simultaneously and it was a 
huge task for us,” added Geraldine Namirembe 
Bitamazire, minister of state for primary education. 
“Overnight the teacher:pupil ratio rose to 1:110.”
The government doubled the number of teachers 
to 125,000; built a staggering 51,203 classrooms and 
has another 36,674 more under construction; it has 
delivered 87,000 desks since 1998; and increased 
the supply of textbooks from 16,000 in 1995 to 3m 
in 1999. But even that massive investment has not 
kept up with the numbers entering school and the 
country is now struggling to recover from the initial 
drastic fall in the quality of education. 
With 7.5 m pupils in 13,332 primary schools there 
is still only one teacher per 60 pupils on average. 
Many schools are terribly overcrowded and some 
Over 
2 million 
children 
entered 
school at 
the same 
time
Left:  At the Olympic 
Primary School 
in Nairobi, 5,000 
hopeful pupils turned 
up for enrolment  last 
January, when the 
new government 
made primary 
education free.
Above: Across the 
country, many 
are still waiting for 
a classroom.

have classes crammed with 150 pupils.
Moreover, in rural schools I visited, the new walls 
and floors are cracked, there are sub-standard pit-
latrines and doors and windows are broken.
Many still have severe shortages of desks, with 
lower primary pupils having to sit on stones. At 
Kawaso Primary School in Mukono, where a teacher 
said the money for building classes had been stolen, 
I found children still being taught under a tree. 
Despite the massive injection of textbooks, three 
pupils share every textbook in the core subjects of 
maths, science, English and social studies.
The ministry spent US$14 per primary pupil 
in 1999, but this is not enough to provide a good 
quality education to every child, according to Paul 
Murphy a World Bank specialist in Kampala. He 
urged the government to clamp down on officials 
who were stealing or diverting funds from education 
to other programmes.
Dr Makubuya said Uganda is already spending 
a colossal 31 percent of its total recurrent budget 
on education with primary education taking 70 
percent of that. But the UPE drive would have failed 
disastrously without aid from the donor consortium 
which last year provided 80 percent of the US$710 
million spent on Uganda’s education strategic 
investment plan. 
Uganda’s universal primary education effort 
stands head and shoulders above Kenya, Tanzania 
and elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa. Yet more than 
one in four primary-age-children are still not in 
school. 
Wachira Kigotho 
Bilateral aid for basic education (1999-2000 average)
Country/$m
Australia  34.9
Belgium  3.16
Canada  12.98
France  31.5
Germany  72
Italy  0.27
Japan  48.61
Netherlands  85
Spain  12.63
UK  69.14
US  154.72
