Voices of change
In Reflect programmes in India, learners are using literacy 
to challenge those who keep them poor

Their 
weapons 
are home- 
made 
aps, 
matrices 
and flow 
charts
Thirty four villagers have gathered on a 
rug laid on the dusty earth in front 
of a thatched mudhouse in Bubel village, in drought-
prone Orissa, eastern India. The women’s leader, 
Jangyabata Suna, rouses them from the fatigue of a 
day’s labour with a song about taking on the money 
men. “We can’t pay off all the bribes they demand 
of us, but we must stand on our own two feet,” 
she sings. “Rise up poor people of our country, we 
should not have to live like this.”
It is a revolutionary movement, but their weapons 
are not the forks and cudgels of peasant revolts: they 
are homemade maps, matrices and flow charts, used 
to  campaign for justice. 
These are “untouchables” or poorest-caste people 
who by tradition are shunned by  other castes and 
forced to live in a separate quarter of the village. 
They used to accept their lot with grim fatalism, 
until a new type of development and literacy 
programme began in Bubel. The programme is 
called Reflect and is being run by NGOs, ActionAid 
and the India Rural Reconstruction Movement. The 
technique, which is being used by 350 organisations 
in 60 countries involves villagers analysing and 
taking collective action against the causes of their 
poverty. In the process literacy is taught and used 
as a key tool. it is the most radical example of the 
new thinking in adult literacy. The learning is geared 
very specifically to an immediate use they have for 
it. Here this means challenging officials who have 
exploited their illiteracy in ways that have kept them 
poor.
“The literacy activity starts with the development 
of the people’s own plans in a way that demystifies 
the power of literacy,” says David Archer, head of 
education at ActionAid, “That shows it can be used 
meaningfully by people to assert their voices.”
Typically a village facilitator helps create charts 
and matrices examining how a chosen issue affects 
participants. A village map, for instance, can be 
drawn in the soil with berries representing each 
person in each home, then copied, so that the 

illiterate group members get used to the idea of 
encoding and representation used in writing.
The facilitator then helps them analyze the key 
words from the discussion, breaking them down 
into syllables and looking at what other words 
could be made with these syllables. In Bubel the 
villagers went straight from planning to taking 
action, picking up literacy where it is useful as an 
aid on the way. But the ability to record information 
and read govenment documents are time and again 
proving critical in challenging local politicians and 
institutions to give them aid they are entitled to.
Dhekel Singh Mona, the facilitator rolls out a map 
on the rug which depicts each road and house in the 
village and other buildings and services in coloured 
felt pen. One by one the villagers tell me how they 
have used literacy to claim their rights.
”Before we didn’t know what we should know,” 
says group member Ayli Mona. “Day by day we 
came across new things, became aware of the 
outside world and what we should be getting - and 
now we are fighting for these things.”
By drawing up the map and carrying out a survey 
of the 284 households in the village they found 
out which families were prone to suffering periods 
of great hunger when drought sets in. Using these 
figures they persuaded every family in the village 
to set aside a bowl of rice each day as a food 
contingency and have created a seed bank to help 
families whose stocks are wiped out. “We have 
drought every year, but now whoever is needy we 
are giving it to them,” explains Jangyabata. 
The survey showed that the 
102 families listed as below 
the offical poverty line and 
qualifying for ration cards 
were not all the poorest. A 
local politician had been 
handing out favours at the 
expense of those genuinely 
in need. By presenting 
their findings to the village 
assembly, they ensured 
deserving villagers could buy 
rice at a reduced price.
A bigger battle was 
fought over the issuing of 
food supplies by the Public 
Distribution System after a 
serious drought two years 
ago, when the villagers found 
there was no grain for them at 
the local distribution point.
A group of the women 
members went to protest to the panchayat 
(parish) leader, at one point setting on him in their 
desperation. When he claimed there was no grain, 
they took the matter to the Block (local district) 
Development Office, demanded access to the grain 
store records and found that grain had arrived in 
their name during the two months that they had 
been denied it, but had been falsely signed for. 
Now they are pursuing a case of corruption and 
demanding compensation.
LITERATE WITHIN TWO YEARS
Other Reflect groups are involved in conducting 
audits of how aid is spend in their community.
A strength and weakness of the Reflect method 
is the heavy reliance on the capabilities of the 
facilitators, who meet regularly to share ideas and 
discuss issues that need wider mobilization.
They are supplied with specialist materials such 
as a picture booklet about the rights of migrant 
workers, pamphlets about the rights of non-timber 
forest producers, a booklet on local government 
structures. 
Independent evaluation of pilot Reflect 
programmes in Bangladesh, El Salvador and 
Uganda, found that 60 to 70 percent of participants 
became literate within two years. This  compares to 
World Bank findings that only 12 percent of adult 
learners become functionally literate in traditional 
programmes. 
Dhekel Singh Mona carries with him a chart with 
each member’s name and a list of skills against 
which they mark their own level of achievement. 
These include being able to listen, speak in a 
meeting, speak in a meeting of outsiders, read and 
write. For instance grade two writing means being 
able to make rough notes from dictation but not 
without mistakes.
Eighteen of the group never went to school at 
all and six women can’t write their name, but that 
doesn’t stop them playing a full role because in 
meetings the literate members share the information 
with other members. 
Of 22 people listed on the chart, 15 can now read 
and write, but more significant is the use to which 
the skill is being put. Reflect member Shakan Bari 
says he forgot how to read because he never needed 
to after school, but now that documents are central 
part of their struggle in local elected assemblies it 
has become a part of his daily life.
Brendan O’Malley
Left: Dhekel Singh 
Mona (centre) the 
Reflect facilitator at 
Bubel village, Orissa, 
encourages group 
members 
to create maps and 
chats analyzing 
development 
problems. 
Below: Jangyabata 
Suna (in green) leads 
villagers in a song 
encouraging them 
to stand up against 
corrupt officials
