Village revolutions
Hira Akhtar, 30, has invited me 
into her new house to see how 
her life has changed. She lives 
in one of hundreds of homesteads scattered amid 
clumps of coconut and date trees in Baniyar Kandar, 
a village surrounded by a watery patchwork of paddi 
fields in Jheneidah region, western Bangladesh.
Ten years ago, Hira explained, she and her 
husband, lived in a simple thatched hut, choked 
on smoke from cooking on an open fire, and awoke 
with the aches and pains that come from sleeping 
on a thin mat on a hard dusty mud floor.
It was all they could afford on the 1,000 taka 
(US$17) a month her husband Moslem Uddin made 

A pioneering style of literacy 
learning being promoted across 
Asia is enabling women to 
transform their lives and those 
of their families 

as a share-cropper working rented fields. 
Today Moslem still earns the same amount 
working the land, every inch of which is cultivated 
in this densely populated area.
But Hira now earns 4,000 taka a month by 
using skills she picked up in a new style of literacy 
programme that is making inroads where traditional 
adult learning programmes have failed. 
Six years ago a non-governmental organization 
called Dhaka Ahsania Mission started classes in 
her village. They allotted a room in the house next 
door to Hira’s for people to meet and called it 
Ganokendra (The people’s centre). Soon her women 
friends were asking her to come along.
It was a big step to take. The women in her village 
were not allowed out, they could not meet strangers 
even if they visited their homes and most had never 
been to school.
“By tradition we could not even pronounce our 
husband’s name,” said Hira.
When she asked permission from her husband, 
who could barely pen a signature himself, he threw 
up his hands. “What will happen by reading all 
these books?” he asked.
But these were not ordinary books and the classes 
were not like at a school.
The NGO opened membership of the Ganokendra 
to representatives of the 250 poorest families out of 
the 311 families in the village - those earning less 
than 2,700 taka (US$47) a month - and ensured that 
75 percent of them were the most disadvantaged 
members of those families: women. 
The classes concentrate on literacy, numeracy, and 
subjects relevant to the learners’ lives. These might 
include how to: reduce sewage pollution of water 
supplies by using latrines, stave off deforestation by 
planting useful trees, and make fuel-efficient ovens 
to use less wood and reduce smoke in the house. 
There is training in skills that could bring in an 
income such as needlework, gender development 
education to secure for women a say in the running 
of the village, and leadership training to make 
community action more effective.
 “Education can transform their whole life,” 
said Shuelie Aktar, 24, the local facilitator - a 
guide, rather than a teacher, who is paid 1,000 
taka a month - at the Baniyar Kandar’s Twilight 
Ganokendra, which Hira attends. “It’s not only 
important to them, it’s important to their children, 
because they will send them to school.”
There is also a strong emphasis on social 
mobilization on issues such as education rights, 
fighting child trafficking and child marriages, and 
anti-drugs awareness and support work.
“We don’t just give literacy only,” said Shuelie 
Aktur, who has a master’s degree in management.  
“We also provide cultural programmes and micro 
credit. Members make regular savings and from the 
central fund created they give loans to members to 
help them rear poultry, do tailoring or other small 
business activities.”
At the heart of the literacy is flexible and co-
operative learning and the creation of literature that 
Ganokendra members think will be useful once they 
can read. 
Inside the Baniyar Ganokendra, which is now 
housed in a building built by the local community, 
the walls are covered from ceiling to floor in 
awareness posters and charts related to local issues.
About 15 women are practising reading exercises, 
such as completing word-making matrices, in their 
activity books. They are arranged in three groups 
according to their reading grade - five grades, A 
to E, which are determined every month. Grade 
A students can read a newspaper. Each of the 
low-grade groups are assisted by a member from a 
higher grade, who helps learners with any text they 
can’t understand.
Fatema Khatun, 55, wearing a faded green shawl 
and cheeks full of laughter lines, didn’t go to school 
when she was a girl because of the social taboos. 
But she is an enthusiastic learner.
“This Ganokendra has taught us lot of things. 
Now we can take care of our health and I’m an 
expert in making and using the unnatachula (a fuel-
efficient oven with a chimney drawing the smoke 
out through a hole in the wall). I teach the others 
how to make them.”
She said in an earlier adult education centre 
the whole class was taken by one teacher and the 
textbooks were too dominated by pictures and were 
too easy, but now they have group teaching.
Above: Aleya Begum, 
35, a widow with 
three children from 
Rajapur village, who 
started a poultry 
business after 
receiving training 
from the Ganokendra. 
Far left:  Hira Akhtar, 
30, shows off her 
new brick house  in  
Baniyar Kandar

Her grade D group is being helped by a grade C 
16-year-old schoolgirl Somtto Bhan, who says it 
gives her good practice in reading. 
For Somtto the real attraction of the Ganokendra 
is the range of literature it gives her access to, 
including different types of books and newspapers. 
“There’s lots of things to learn in them,” she said.
This is perhaps the unique contribution of the 
Dhaka Ahsania Mission’s Ganokendra work, which 
is based on a Community Learning Centre concept 
promoted by UNESCO throughout Asia and the 
Pacific over the past decade. Government adult 
literacy projects have been criticized in the past for 
using texts suited to urban middle class learners that 
don’t relate to life in rural areas.
Radical projects such as the Reflect programmes 
inspired by ActionAid (see next story) use crude 
self-made texts, which are mainly representations of 
villagers’ analysis of various problems they face. 
But Dhaka Ahsania has found a third way, 
by creating a national resource centre that can 
respond to local interests. The subjects are chosen 
in response to surveys carried in the rural villages 
and are tested on pilot groups before being mass 
produced.
Most of them are information books geared to 
awareness campaigns or particular skills or fields of 
knowledge that Ganokendra members say they want 
to know more about. But, crucially, they are not 

written as dry manuals. Instead the information is 
imparted through stories about people carrying out 
the same tasks, making them an enjoyable read.
Across Bangladesh more than 50,000 of the 
poorest people will this year be using Dhaka 
Ahsania Mission self-learning guides to learn how 
to read and write. After a five-month course and 
one month reinforcement learning at one of 800 
Ganokendras, they will reach out for the books, 
skills training and small-scale credit that will help 
them improve life in their community.
A crucial factor in the success of the centres is 
that each one is run by a committee of members 
and comes together to discuss issues concerning the 
whole village.
A survey of Rogaghurampur, a 100-household 
village of 450 people in Jessore district, where 
63 families had been active members of the 
“In the early days, 
many of the women who 
returned home late 
from classes were beaten. 
Now attitudes have 
changed completely.”
Ganokendra since 1998, has documented the 
dramatic changes since the centre began its work 
(see table, far left).
By December 2002, the percentage of families 
using literacy had more than doubled from 30 to 65, 
the number using latrines and fuel efficient ovens 
had soared; the practice of marrying children off at 
13 or younger had been wiped out with expected 
knock-on effects on the number and spacing of 
pregnancies; the role of women in decision-making 
and earning an income had been completely 
transformed and the percentage of girls going to 
school had jumped from 30 percent to 100 percent.
The same kind of records have not been kept in 
Baniyar Kandar, but Hira’s new 60,000 taka home 
is just one example of the village-wide changes that 
have taken place. 
Hira built up a steady pile of savings from sewing 
work she developed at the Ganokendra and with 
the help of a loan was able to replace the mudhut. 
The spacious rough red-brick bungalow, complete 
with a brand new corrugated iron roof, has a broad 
verandah overlooking the courtyard where a carpet 
of pulses has been laid out to dry.
In her bedroom the sleeping mat has been 
replaced by a wooden-framed double bed with 
a futon-style mattress and brightly coloured 
cushions. Poster adorn the walls and on the covered 
sideboard, in pride of place, is a television. Eighteen 
poor families in Baniyar Kandar now have a house 
like Hira’s and 100 have a television.
But perhaps more significant is the ebullience 
and confidence of the women of the village, 
characterized by the fact that Hira did not have to 
think twice about inviting a group of outsiders to 
look around her family compound. Through her 
use of literacy she has liberated herself from the 
constraints of male-dominated traditions, as well as 
from many aspects of poverty, and now her husband 
asks her to borrow books for him to read.
“In the early days, many of the women who 
returned home late from the classes were beaten. 
Men didn’t think we should leave the house for 
anything,” said Hira.
“But now attitudes have changed completely. 
The status of women has been raised a lot. Now if 
someone says your wife needs to go for training in 
Dhaka, the husband will gladly agree.” 
Brendan O’Malley
Women from 
Rogaghurampur 
village, western 
Bangladesh,  on their 
way to collect their 
monthly allowance 
for sending their 
children to school. 
The Ganokendras 
have created a 
literate environment 
in which school is 
valued 
