Memory of the World, 
the Key to Diversity
UNESCO established the Memory 
of the World (MOW) programme ten 
years ago to preserve and promote 
documentary heritage, much of 
it endangered. Yet this heritage is as 
important for humanity’s cultural 
diversity as the sites and monuments 
on UNESCO’s World Heritage List. This 
is why the programme launched the 
World Register of documentary heritage 
of universal value
The register includes the oldest 
surviving book produced with 
moveable type, the second of a 
two-volume set of a Korean “Anthology of Great 
Buddhist Priests’ Zen Teachings”. The Baegun 
hwasang chorok buljo jikji simche yojeol was 
printed in July 1377 in a temple in Cheongju. 
Also known as Jikji (from a phrase about the 
attainment of enlightenment by direct appeal 
to the mind), it was compiled by Priest Baegun 
when he was 75, and reflects the teachings 
of his instructor, Zen Buddhist master Seogok 
Cheonggong.
The book is one of 68 documentary heritage 
properties from 33 countries inscribed on 
the World Register. Other entries include: the 
Gutenberg Bible (Germany), the first book to 
be printed in Europe and the earliest Bible ever 
printed; the Codex Techaloyan de Cuajimalpaz 
(Mexico) whose pictorial material and Nahuatl 
text describe how indigenous communities 
were established in various places in the Valley 
of Mexico City; the Dainu Skapis Cabinet of 
Folksongs (Latria); and the Archives of the 
Warsaw Ghetto. The Register gives us an idea of 
the enormous variety of documentary heritage 
around the world worth preserving because of its 
enduring importance to scholars and because it 
testifies to cultural achievements that have had a 
far-reaching influence.
MORE THAN A PAPER HISTORY
“Our purpose is not conservation for its own 
sake, but conservation in order to make this 
heritage more accessible,” argues the head of 
the MOW programme Abdelaziz Abid. Giving 
publicity to this heritage helps to attract resources 
for preservation. Digitalization through scanning, 
posting the collections on the Web and producing 
CD-Roms makes these documents accessible to a 
huge number of people without subjecting them 
to physical stress. Oblivion, on the other hand, 
leads to neglect, says Abid.
In 2001 the futuristic masterpiece Metropolis, 
by German film director Fritz Lang, became the 
first feature film on the Register. The inscription 
prompted numerous screenings and helped give 
a new lease of life to the work, according to 
Abid. He also says that publicity events around 
the inscription helped raise awareness of the 
importance of film preservation in general.
Also on the Register are the 4,000 or so 
recordings of the Vienna Phonogammarchiv, the 
first sound archive ever created (1899), featuring 
ethno-linguistic and ethno-musical material 
collected by anthropologists all over the world. 
This material bears testimony to many cultures 
which have since disappeared or been deeply 
changed by Western influences.
The director of Phonogrammarchiv, Dietrich 
Schüller, who is also the chairman of the 
International Advisory Committee of MOW, 
explains that no single institution anywhere can 
claim to preserve enough material in any one 
field. The MOW programme, he explains, aims to 
convince tax-payers and politicians around the 
world that more effort, and a better distribution 
of labour is needed to preserve the testimonies of 
the world’s cultures.

The library at the 
Haeinsa complex 
of monasteries in 
Korea is home to 
the country’s most 
sacred collection of 
Buddhist literature. 
Carved some 
700 years ago in 
classical Chinese 
on more than 80,000 
wooden blocks, 
they replace the 
original set, which 
was completed in 
1087 and destroyed 
by invading Mongols 
in 1232. In the 1970s, 
President Park 
Jeung-hui ordered 
a new storage hall 
to be built with 
modern equipment 
for ventilation, 
temperature and 
humidity control. 
Mildew soon 
appeared on the 
test blocks and 
the plan was 
abandoned, proving 
the superiority of 
the temple library’s 
traditional structure

HEAVY LOSSES LOOMING
“Much of the material stored in research 
institutions will disappear within the next 50 years 
and great losses have already been incurred,” 
argues Schüller. “Eighty percent of audiovisual 
documents in the anthropological field, dialects, 
musical festivals etc. are not kept in archives 
proper but in collections attached to research 
institutions and museums. Their analogue 
documents are still playable, but many of them, 
and increasingly so, are chemically unstable 
and sooner or later all magnetic tapes we have 
will deteriorate to a point they will no longer be 
playable. Another problem is that the old replay 
machines are about to disappear and then, even if 
you have the best-preserved collections, you will 
not have the machinery to play them. Unless there 
is concerted effort country by country on a grand 
scale to digitize this material, the knowledge we 
have today − especially in the fields of social 
and cultural anthropology, will fade away.” We 
stand to “lose 80 percent of what we have in 
the anthropological field,” he insists, explaining 
that “generally speaking, the more modern the 
support, the less stable it is, a wax cylinder 
recording lasts longer than a magnetic tape or 
CD-Rom.”
Similarly, old paper is more stable than the 
acidic wood pulp paper introduced in the mid-
19th century. Acidic paper poses a problem for 
collections of 19th and 20th centuries printed texts 
and manuscripts, particularly those situated in 
countries in transition, in Eastern Europe and the 
former Soviet Union where most of the printing 


was done on the cheapest paper, says Guy 
Petheridge of AusHeritage, network in Australiaé, 
who has carried out an evaluation of the MOW 
programme.
Institutions in developing countries are hard 
put to pay for scanning technologies now used 
by Western libraries and institutions to save 
threatened material. There have recently been 
reports in the press about the sorry state of one 
of Argentina’s largest print media libraries, the 
José Hernández Library in Buenos Aires where 
110 years of Argentinean newspapers are rotting 
away, victims of the economic crisis that has hit 
the country.
INDIGENOUS DOCUMENTARY 
HERITAGE
Documentary heritage is a nearly universal 
phenomenon, with properties worth saving in 
places not generally known for their written 
culture. Thus, four sets of Philippines syllabaries 
of the 10th century AD, the Philippines 
Paleographs, are on the Register. They represent 
articulate sounds and remain in use to this day.
“There is a western assumption that indigenous 
people only have oral traditions”, says Petheridge, 
and “when the first Spanish navigators arrived 
in the Philippines, they were amazed by the fact 
that here were people who were not credited 
with the nobility of the writing tradition, merrily 
writing away. This was also the case in Sumatra. 
We have records of systems going back to the 
7th or 8th centuries AD but which may be older. 
The Bataks in northern Sumatra still preserve 
the tradition of writing complex divinatory 
manuscripts. In the Philippines a couple of 
hunter-gatherer populations are keeping that 
script alive.”
The preservation of this documentary 
heritage should help us appreciate the wealth 
of humanity’s cultures and the programme’s 
usefulness - especially its endeavours to digitize 
material - becomes all the more apparent when 
considering the huge losses that have already 
been suffered over the past century such as the 
destruction of some of the most precious books 
and manuscripts preserved in Germany when 
a flood hit the cellars of the former Royal and 
Provincial Library in Hanover in 1946; or the 
damage by fire of about 3.6 million books in 
the former Soviet Union’s Academy of Sciences 
Library in Leningrad in 1988, described as the 
single greatest library disaster in the 20th century.
Roni Amelan
