Literacy is freedom, according to the Brazilian philosopher Paolo Freire, 
but for hundreds of millions of the world’s poorest people the 
 opposite is also true: illiteracy is a tool of oppression.
  Village revolutions   p.56
Bangladeshi lesson
 Voices of change   p.60
Empowerment in India
  Slum haven   p.62
A pioneering Delhi school
Conceived and prepared by 
Brendan O’Malley, International 
Editor of the British weekly, The
Times Educational Supplement
It means, for instance, that corrupt local officials in drought-stricken 
eastern India can withhold rations from poor farmers in favour of 
their own cronies, because the farmers can’t read the official list of 
beneficiaries; or that divorced women and their children in rural villages 
of Bangladesh are left to starve when their husband leaves them, because 
they haven’t been able to register their marriage, so can’t claim their right 
to a share of the family home.
Today an estimated 861 million adults including 140 million 15-24 
year-olds worldwide are illiterate, despite literacy being recognised as a 
human right more than half a century ago. Of course, there is much to 
debate about how illiteracy is defined in different countries. But there is 
widespread acceptance that if we are to live in a world where every man, 
woman and child can fulfil their potential as free human beings, illiteracy 
must be tackled.
The most powerful engine of change is the worldwide commitment to 
achieve Education for All by 2015, made at the World Education Forum in 
Dakar, Senegal, in 2000.
Providing a good primary education to every child is the key to 
preventing today’s children becoming tomorrow’s new generation of 
illiterate adults. But the international community has so far failed to offer 
more than a token gesture towards the Dakar promise that no country 
seriously committed to achieving Education for All would miss the goal 
for want of resources.
Without more funds, countries that abolish school fees, for example, 
will struggle to prevent a mass intake of pupils being matched by 
plummeting quality of learning as pupil:teacher and pupil:textbook ratios 
shoot up.  The United Nations Literacy Decade (2003-12) can contribute by 
focusing attention on the need to ensure that rising levels of literacy are 
achieved alongside rising enrolment.
Stamping out illiteracy is a global imperative not 
just to help individuals fulfil their potential but because 
literacy can be used as powerful tool for change 
in the worldwide fight against poverty and injustice. 
This report examines how the problem can be tackled


Schools are only part of the solution, however, because a 
massive number of adults and youths have never been to 
school and huge numbers of children who do go drop out 
before they have learned to read and write.
The record of formal adult literacy programmes shows 
that new ways of learning literacy and creating lasting 
literate environments need to be developed if the target of 
halving adult literacy is to be achieved.
This means having flexible lesson and course completion 
times, learning material tailored to the learner’s interests 
and culture, teachers or facilitators trained and supported 
in using active learning methods, and learners having a 
say in the running of their own education. Above all, as is 
shown in three very different and successful programmes 
documented in this report – the people’s centres in 
Bangladesh, a Reflect programme in Orissa, and a slum 
school in New Delhi – it involves learners consolidating 
their literacy by putting it to use in the most dynamic of 
ways: tackling the causes of their own poverty, challenging 
injustice and improving life in their community.
Brendan O’Malley

