Aung San Suu Kyi
Her compatriots 
call her the 
«iron butterfly», 
a name that 
evokes both 
her non-violent 
combat for 
democracy and 
the strength of 
her character. 
Aung San Suu 
Kyi, 57, talks 
to the new 
Courier about 
the political 
evolution of her 
country since 
her release 
from house 
arrest in May 
lasy year

You recently received the UNESCO Madanjeet Singh 
Prize for Tolerance and Non-Violence. Over many years, 
you have been given countless international awards, 
including the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. How helpful 
have these awards been for you?
  It’s very helpful to the movement because 
 it’s a sign that people all over the world support us and feel 
for us. So I do not look upon these awards as something 
personal, but as something given to the movement.
What are you expecting from the international 
community and especially from the UN? 
 We would like to see the UN standing very firmly by 
the General Assembly resolution1 on Burma and to try to 
implement the terms of the resolution as quickly as possible. 
And we would like the whole international community to 
support the UN and this. 
What has been the impact of international 
sanctions?
 When people talk about international sanctions they 
generally are talking about the US sanctions. And I often 
have to remind people that the US sanctions simply prevent 
United States businessmen from making new investments. 
The investments that were made before the sanctions were 
implemented are still in place. From this point of view, we 
cannot say that these sanctions have had a very important 
impact economically. But they have had very important 
political impact, because they demonstrate that the people 
of the United States are concerned about what is going on 
in Burma. And the fact that the United States has imposed 
sanctions also makes other countries sit up and take notice.
Do you think sanctions can push the country 
towards democracy? 
 I don’t think the sanctions alone will push the country 
towards democracy. I think in a complex situation like ours 
we need many, many different lines of effort before we can 
achieve the changes that we want.
What is your interpretation, your vision 
of democracy?  
 It is something I ask people of Burma when I go travelling 
all over the country. Especially when I come to rural 
Burma, to villages, I will ask people what they mean by the 
After a 28-year journey 
as a student and 
scholar, Aung San Suu 
Kyi returned home to 
Rangoon to nurse her 
dying mother in 1988.
The then 43-year-old 
daughter of national 
hero General Aung 
San - the assassinated 
negotiator for Burmese 
independence from the 
British - found herself 
caught in the middle 
of an unprecedented 
political struggle for 
democracy in her 
homeland. Millions 
of people had hit 
the streets to put an 
end to the Ne Win 
government’s 26-year 
dictatorship, and 
thousands of pro-
democracy protestors 
were masacred.
Confronted with an 
army threatening to 
shoot her while she 
campaigned in the 
Irrawaddy Delta, and 
cheered by a crowd of 
half a million people 
listening to her call for 
democratic government 
in Rangoon, Suu Kyi 
was soon recognized as 
a symbol of democracy. 
She was elected 
General Secretary of 
the newly founded 
National League for 
Democracy, which won 
82% of the seats in the 
legislative elections of 
May 1990.  This was an 
historic success that 
the ruling military junta 
neither accepted nor 
forgot. 
The democratic 
cause, coupled 
with her immense 
popularity, earned 
Suu Kyi international 
recognition and the 
1991 Nobel Peace Prize. 
But back home the 
junta placed her under 
a total of eight years of 
house arrest. 
Aung San Suu Kyi 
continues to resist, 
saying “there WILL 
be change because 
ALL the military have 
are guns.”  Her latest 
19-month period of 
house arrest ended in 
May 2002. Since then 
she has been able to 
travel through different 
provinces.
A victory? A step 
closer to national 
reconciliation? The 
iron butterfly, as local 
people 
call her, is 
cautiously 
optimistic.
Th
e 
ro
ck
y 
ro
ad
 t
o 
de
m
oc
ra
cy
1. On November 19, 2002, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution 
strongly urging the Government of Myanmar “to restore democracy and 
implement the results of the 1990 election and to ensure that the contacts with 
Aung San Suu Kyi and other leaders of the National League for Democracy 
move without delay into substantive and structured dialogue towards 
democratisation and national reconciliation and at an early stage to include 
other political leaders in these talks, including the representatives of the ethnic 
groups [...] to release unconditionnally and immediately all political prisoners.”

tremendous support of young people and the sense of 
solidarity between different ethnic nationalities of Burma.
How important is the ethnic coalition for you? 
 Oh, it is most important; it is the most important thing. 
Because Burma is a Union, it is a country made up of many 
different ethnic nationalities, and unless we can achieve 
true solidarity we shall never be at peace. What we need is 
a system of a federal nature that takes into consideration all 
the aspirations of different nationalities. As I said just now, 
I found there was tremendous solidarity among the ethnic 
nationalities when I visited the states of Shan and Arakan. 
The welcome that I received from the general public there 
was most heart-warming and very, very encouraging. So I 
think we are moving very steadily towards true solidarity. 
What are the next steps? 
 The next steps are to achieve dialogue. I think we’ve got to sit 
down and to talk over matters important to this country with 
the SPDC. (The ruling State Peace and Development Council)
What is the current human rights situation in Burma? 
 We still do not enjoy the basic human rights as spelled out 
in the United Nation Declaration of Human Rights.
What about the situation of political prisoners? 
 They have been number of releases of political prisoners, 
but there are still hundreds of such prisoners behind bars.   
democracy, why do they want democracy. And quite often 
they just say we want to be free. So I define democracy as a 
system that guarantees both freedom and security. Of course 
people have to feel secure, but we don’t want a false kind 
of security, which allows no freedom at all. So this is what 
I mean by democracy. Of course this means there have to 
be the basic democratic institutions such as an independent 
judiciary, regular free and fair elections,  free press and so 
on. But given these basics I think we will probably find our 
own form of democracy. This has happened all over the 
world. France has its own kind of democracy, and the United 
States has its own kind of democracy, for example. 
 Do you think international support had something 
to do with your release last May? 
 As I said, not everything is due to international support. 
But international support does play an important part. 
What are the other factors? 
 The fact that people in our country do want change. And 
that it is better for us to be on good terms than to be on 
bad terms. I would like to give the regime the benefit of 
the doubt, and I would like to believe that they genuinely 
want to do what is good for the country. And they see that 
reconciliation is the best thing possible that can be done.
Are you really free? 
 I am free. But freedom is relative, in the sense that I am 
free, but people are not always free to come to see me. This 
was made obvious during my last trip to the state of Arakan 
when the general public were prevented from coming to 
meet me, to demonstrate their support for me. 
When I was released, I said that I have been released but 
we have not achieved democracy. So it’s certainly nothing 
like the end of the road. We are just somewhere at the 
beginning, because we’ve got to move forward. And the 
message I would like to get across to everybody now is that 
it’s important for us to move forward as quickly as possible 
for the sake of the country.
Have you been able to resume your normal 
political activities as the leader of a lawful party ?  
 I am not yet able to operate as a normal leader of a normal 
political party, because none of the political parties in Burma 
are allowed to operate as normal political parties.  This is 
what we’re trying to achieve, this is one of the factors that is 
important for the process of change. 
The political situation has changed to a certain degree. 
The most obvious change, of course, is that the National 
League of Democracy has been able to expand operations 
to a certain extent. I’ve been able to go around the country. 
But I think the most promising thing I’ve discovered, 
not necessarily a change brought from my release, is the 

One of our demands is that they be released unconditionally 
as soon as possible. 
How are negotiations for their release progressing? 
 We have not had any negotiations. 
What are the main needs of Burma in terms 
of education and culture? 
 In terms of education we need a lot of things. I’m 
especially concerned about tertiary education because too 
many young people are leaving school uneducated. The 
whole system needs to be revised. With regard to culture, we 
are made up of many ethnic nationalities, as we discussed 
earlier, and it’s very important that we try to preserve the 
different cultural strands in this country. Democracy will 
give everybody a chance to make their contribution to the 
development of educational and cultural matters. So what 
democracy does is to provide people with an opportunity 
to freely use their talents for the sake of the country. I 
think there should be flowering of cultural and educational 
institutes, organizations, activities.
What do you answer to the people who say that 
the human rights are a western concept, not relevant 
in Asia? 
 My answer is to ask: are Asians not human beings?
Interview by LIN Zuqiang
◗	June 19, 1945:
Born in Rangoon. She is 
the daughter of General 
Aung San, then national 
leader, and Daw Khin Kyi, 
the Burmese ambassador 
to India in 1960s. 
◗	September 24, 1988:
Founding of the National 
League for Democracy 
(NLD) in Rangoon. Aung 
San Suu Kyi becomes the 
Secretary General of the 
NLD.
◗	May 27, 1990
Despite her being 
detained by the military 
government, the national 
League for Democracy 
wins 396 seats out of 485 
( 82 % ) in the general 
legislative elections. 
The junta refuses to 
recognize the result of 
the elections.
◗ October 14, 1991:
Awarded the 1991 Nobel 
Peace Prize
◗	January 22, 2002
Meeting with European 
Union delegation at 
her residence. The EU 
mission was aimed at 
breaking the deadlock 
between the junta and 
Aung San Suu Kyi. 
◗ April 25, 2002
Meeting with the UN 
envoy Razali Ismail.
◗	 May 6, 2002:
Released from the latest 
19 month period of house 
arrest
◗	October 2002
Awarded the 2002 
UNESCO Madanjeet 
Singh Prize for “tolerance 
and non-violence”
◗	February 6, 2003
Awarded  the $ 1 million 
2002 Al Neuharth Free 
Spirit of the Year prize 
by the American human 
rights organization, 
Freedom Forum 
