rom information 
society to knowledge 
societies 
fs a 
© David Lefranc/Gamma NY, Paris 
Technological measures alone will Ou ox the past decade, new information 
. . and communication technology 
not be enough to bridge the digital (ICT) has triggered a quiet revolution, especially 
divide. UNESCO believes that the social, affecting higher education and access to 
. information. And the revolution is only just 
Dp olitical and cultural asp ects of the beginning. There are great hopes that ICT will 
information revolution must be tackled, boost freedom of expression and cultural diversity, 
. . good governance and, not least, the fight against 
if peop le in Ni orth and South are to poverty. But there are caveats, as the World 
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in 
Geneva, Switzerland, is likely to highlight in 
December this year, when it looks into ways to 
reap its benefits fully 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

Pa
ri
s 
Access is spreading 
bridge the so-called digital divide that separates . . 
in all regions of 
rich and poor countries, and communities within 
I the world. But is 
the same country. oo ( acts everybody able to get 
UNESCO Director-General Koichiro Matsuura . . 
b al. * inf ] p the information they 
observes t a, access to in ormation an A n 11 A Y 0, S want, and need, in a 
knowledge increasingly determines patterns 
] i } language they can 
of learning, cultural expression and social 
Co . Number of Internet users: 665 million understand? 
participation, as well as providing opportunities (forecast for 2003), 580 million in 2002 and 
for development, more effective poverty 10 million in 1993. 
reduction and the preservation of peace. Indeed, 
knowledge has become a principal force of social Number of computers, (2003 forecast): 
transtormation.” 650 million; 610 in 2002; 175 million in 1993. 
Number of computers in the Least Developed 
Countries (LDCs): 1,3 million in 2001 (for a 
population of 684 million). 
This is why UNESCO promotes the concept 
of “knowledge societies,” rather than the more 
technocratic concept of “information society” 
which stresses connectivity and says nothing Number of Internet users in the LDCs: 
about the content and utilization of the new 1,8 million in 2001. 
communication networks. Building knowledge 
Computers connected to the Internet 
societies, Matsuura explains, requires respect per 1,000 inhabitants in 2001: 
for “four key principles: equal access to 
  
  
High income OECD countries 400 
education; freedom of expression; universal OECD 332 
access to information based on a guarantee of Latin America and the Carbon 49 
a strong public domain of information; and the Central and Eastern Europe SICISTRR42:8 
preservation and promotion of cultural diversity, Developing counties 26.5 
including multilingualism.” Easi Asia, Pacific ny 
A prime example of the ICT revolution is the Sub-Saharan Africa 78 
use of distance learning in higher education. rah Soles 15.6 
According to John Daniel, UNESCO Assistant 
Director-General for Education, “throughout 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

  
history education has been constrained within 
an eternal triangle of quality, access and cost. 
With conventional methods quality tends to go 
down when you increase access or cut costs. 
Open universities demonstrate that you can have 
wider access, higher quality and lower costs — all 
at the same time.” Distance education is less 
expensive than traditional education, explains 
Daniel, as shown in a study commissioned by the 
government of the United Kingdom, which reveals 
that the total cost of a degree at the UK Open 
University was between 60 and 80 percent of the 
cost of a traditional degree. 
ICT — WHAT FOR? 
But ICTs has still had little impact on primary 
and secondary education, especially in developing 
countries. It can be argued that the existence 
of 862 million illiterate people in the world and 
211 million child labourers belies the very notion 
of an information society. They are not players in 
the knowledge-based post-industrial era. 
The development of satellite connections and 
broadband (fast internet connections) in the South, 
and the creation of multimedia centres providing 
communities with access to connected computers, 
are two indispensable conditions to expand the 
reach of the new technologies and the knowledge 
they can disseminate. But this is not enough. 

 ICT, especially internet, is a two-way vehicle, 
optimally providing a platform for expression as 
well as access to information. And freedom of 
expression is essential if the internet is to serve 
individuals and communities. As people seek 
answers to their problems, they must be free to 
express their views and share their experiences 
without fearing reprisals for voicing opinions or 
making observations that are not in line with the 
official representation of facts concerning social, 
economic, political, sanitary or cultural issues. 
Amidst concerns for security, notably the 
fight against terrorism, and respect for national 
legislation - paedophilia, drug trafficking and hate 
speech - professional journalist organizations 
such as the International Federation of Journalists 
and the World Association of Newspapers warn 
that freedom of expression, a human right 
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, must be respected. UNESCO supports 
this view, arguing that online information and 
communication must enjoy the same rights as 
traditional print and broadcast media. 
UNESCO is concerned both about the traditional 
harassment of journalists practiced in some 
countries, and about more invisible restrictions on 
freedom of expression, including financial measures 
(i.e. high taxes on necessary equipment and high 
communication tariffs); technical measures (slow 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

UNESCO in action communication 
Mobile ‘phone 
technology is already 
replacing expensive 
telephone landlines 
in places with little 
infrastructure and 
is an increasingly 
viable way to access 
the internet 
development of local telephone networks, filtering 
and blocking software on servers); administrative 
measures (obligation to obtain permission 
from authorities to register websites, refusal of 
installation of international servers); and legislative 
measures restricting sites deemed to contain 
information that is harmful to security or that is 
politically damaging, for example. 
The internet does enable individuals and groups 
to establish independent e-media at a much lower 
cost than has ever been possible before. In that 
sense, it is a formidable tool for media pluralism 
and freedom of expression, but observers note 
  
hl 
that accessing such alternative e-media, finding I= YN 
out about their existence even, is difficult, and 
the traditional media continue to attract the vast 
majority of net-surfers looking for news. 
DIVERSITY IN THE AGE 
OF GLOBALIZATION 
ICT has revolutionized access to information. But 
providing people with access to that information 
does not only depend on making computer The 11 | A na UA % eS most Zid eS ent 
terminals available in places that don’t even have 
electricity, and allowing people to use them. The On the nk exes 
© 
Is
et
t 
S
t
u
a
r
t
/
G
a
m
m
a
,
 
Pa
ri
s 
     
  
   
internet can only be relevant to an individual or In 2003, 90 percent of internet users used just 11 languages. English is 
a community in as far as it provides them with the most utilized language, but Chinese is expected to take the lead in 2007. 
information that is pertinent to their needs in a 
. Others 9.5 % 
language they can understand. Developing local Dutch 1.9 % 
information is furthermore crucial if the ICT is Russian 2.7 % English 35.2 % 
to foster more transparent governance and e- Portuguese 2.8 % 
governance, providing improved interaction with French 3.3 % 
public authorities. Italian 3.6 % 
It is also important to maintain free access 
to public domain information generated by 
publicly funded projects, or material for which 
copyright has lapsed. Copyright is essential as 
an incentive for creativity and for the private 
sector’s willingness to fund research and Spanish 8.1 % 
development. But a balance must be struck 
between copyright and the public’s right to 
access to information, including scientific and 
Korean 4.2 % 
German 6.5 % 
Chinese 11.9 % 
So
ur
ce
: 
ht
tp
:/
/w
ww
.g
lo
ba
l-
re
ac
h.
bi
z/
fr
/i
nd
ex
.p
hp
3 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

NNEJCO StandacA-setking 
educational information. To this end, UNESCO I 
is, for example, involved in the electronic Actions for c)bevsp ACL 
dissemination of free educational course UNESCO will bring to of cultural and linguistic 
material and software such as Linux. WSIS a Recommendation diversity. 
Meanwhile, some see the internet as an on the Promotion and Another international 
instrument of cultural homogenization, while Use of Multilingualism standard-setting instrument 
. and Universal Access UNESCO will present for 
others argue thal, on the contrary, it favours to Cyberspace’. This adoption to the General 
diversity and supports minority cultural legal instrument is Conference is the draft 
groups. Although both trends are apparent, to be submitted for UNESCO Charter on 
Armand Mattelart, Professor of Information and approval to the next the Preservation of 
Communication Sciences at the University of — ii he Eo ho i i, 
: . « So eneral Conference in outlines principles an 
Paris VIII, believes that "at present few minority October 2003. It features recommendations for the 
cultures have the resources necessary to use recommendations on preservation of a heritage 
the internet to make their voices heard.” Dan equitable access to that is an increasingly 
Schiller, Professor of Library & Information information and the important but vulnerable 
Science, Communications, and Media Studies at development of multi- source of knowledge and 
the University of Illinois (U.S.A.) believes that, cultural knowledge ways io safeguardits 
societies and on how to accessibility. 
the dominant trend is “unquestionably against 
diversity in the full sense.” 
facilitate the preservation 
* http://portal.unesco.org/ci/ev.php?URL_ID=8357&URL_ 
THE CASE FOR MULTILINGUALISM DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201&reload 
There are signs of change, though. “It is very 
clear today,” says Schiller, “that the older systems 
of one-way cultural distribution - like TV, with 
  
people in Tonga or East Asia watching reruns of much of that production is lost either because it 
US Westerns — are in a state of metamorphosis.” is deleted when no longer required or because 
Trans-national cultural production is shifting the supports for which it has been produced 
towards commercializing local cultural content cease to be available. UNESCO has been engaged 
on a global scale, which means that the foreign in seeking solutions to this problem, looking to 
cultural influence on products sold to people in ensure permanent accessibility. 
the U.S, for example, is greater than had been Both Mattelart and Schiller believe that 
the case in previous decades. “So there is a new maximizing the social benefits of ICT depends on 
multiform quality to cultural production,” says a strong commitment of the public sector and that 
Schiller. “But is this real cultural diversity, or is it the World Summit on the Information Society and 
the parasitism of cultural diversity?” its preparation provide the arena for a struggle 
One way to promote cultural diversity, between those who favour publicly funded 
backed by UNESCO, is to increase the number initiatives and those who oppose them. 
of languages on the internet and support local Matsuura is convinced that the leaders 
content production in as many languages as attending the World Summit have an opportunity 
possible. This includes dealing with the challenge to utilize the knowledge revolution to improve 
posed by non-Latin scripts in cyberspace. The the lives of people hitherto left behind, both in 
argument is that people’s relationship with the the countries of the South and among certain 
new media, and ability to tap their potential, will communities in the North. 
improve if they are able to find the material they Roni Amelan 
need and want in their language and if they can 
use their language to express their needs and build 
networks. 
Heritage preservation is equally important for 
the promotion of cultural diversity. The concept 
of preservation has taken on a new meaning since 
The World Summit on the Information Society is organized 
by the International Telecommunicatons Union: 
http://www.itu.int/wsis/documents/index.asp 
  
the advent of computers. Digitally produced works and UNESCO: 
and data are linked to soft and hardware which http://portal.unesco.org/ci/ev.php?URL_ID = 1543&URL_ 
become obsolete extremely fast and at present DO =DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION = 201 &reload 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003
