
World Heritage List now numbers 
The 754 sites of “outstanding universal 
value”, including 582 cultural, 149 natural and 
23 mixed sites. 
Five natural sites were added to the List at 
the latest session (June 30-July 3) of the World 
Heritage Committee: Purnululu National Park 
(Australia), Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan 
Protected Areas (China), Uvs Nuur Basin 
(Russian Federation / Mongolia), Monte San 
Giorgio (Switzerland), and Phong Nha - Ke 
Bang National Park (Vietnam). Nineteen new 
cultural sites also received the “world heritage” 
label this year: the cultural landscape and 
archaeological remains of the Bamiyan Valley 
(Afghanistan), Quebrada de Humahuaca 
(Argentina), Historic Quarter of the Seaport City 
of Valparaiso (Chile), Jewish Quarter and St 
Procopius’ Basilica in Trebic (Czech Republic), 
James Island and Related Sites (Gambia), 
Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka (India), Takht-e 
Soleyman (Iran), Ashur/Quala’at at Shergat 
(Iraq), the White City of Tel-Aviv —- the Modern 
Movement (Israel), Sacri Monti of Piedmont 
and Lombardy (Italy), the Mausoleum of 
Khoja Ahmed Yasawi (Kazakhstan), Franciscan 
Missions in the Sierra Gorda of Querétaro 
(Mexico), Wooden Churches of Southern 
Little Poland (Poland), Citadel, Ancient City 
and Fortress Buildings of Derbent (Russian 
Federation), Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape 
(South Africa), Renaissance Monumental 
Ensembles of Ubeda and Baeza (Spain), Gebel 
Barkal and the Sites of the Napatan Region 
(Sudan), Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (United 
Kingdom); Matobo Hills (Zimbabwe). 
IN HONOUR OF BAMIYAN 
The chilling images of the Buddhas of Bamiyan 
exploding in March 2001 are still fresh in our 
minds. Two years on, the cultural landscape and 
archaeological remains of the Bamiyan Valley 
have become part of the heritage of humanity, 
symbolizing the international community’s hope 
that intolerance will never again lead to such 
crimes against culture. 
Located in Afghanistan some 250 km west 
of Kabul, the site showcases the artistic and 
religious developments which characterized 
ancient Bakhtria from the 1% to the 13" centuries. 
© UNESCO 
In the first centuries of our era, the artistic 
expression of Gandhara Buddhist art was born 
of the meeting of Greco-Roman, Indian and 
Parthian influences. For the first time, sculptors 
carved the Buddha in human form. From the 8™ 
century, Islam spread through the Bamiyan Valley, 
gradually replacing Buddhism. The presence of 
Buddhist monasteries and sanctuaries alongside 
ancient fortified edifices from the Islamic period 
reflect this legacy. 
Because of its vulnerability, the site was 
simultaneously inscribed on the World Heritage 
List and on the World Heritage List in Danger. 
Abandoned for many years, it has been the 
target of military action, and antipersonnel 
mines have rendered parts of the valley 
inaccessible. The niches containing fragments of 
the decimated statues are at risk of collapsing. 
The explosions opened cracks in the cliff and 
destroyed mural decorations. The paintings 
adorning some of the 600 caves hewn in 
sandstone are also in poor condition. Finally, 
the battle against looting and illicit excavation 
is far from being won. 
ASHUR, CRADLE OF THE 
ASSYRIAN EMPIRE 
The ancient city of Ashur (Qala’at at Shergat) 
stands on the shores of the Tigris River, in the 
Iraqi part of northern Mesopotamia. Founded by 
the Sumerians in the 3" millennium BC, the city 
was progressively occupied by the Assyrians, 
who appear to have left their nomadic lifestyle to 
settle there. In the 2° millennium BC, it became 
the first capital of the Assyrian empire, eventually 
stretching over a territory of a size unprecedented 
in the Middle East. 
Above: the 350 
million year-old 
sandstone mounds 
of the Bungle Bungle 
mountain range 
in the Purnululu 
National Park 
(Australia). 
Left: Cave D 
at Bamiyan 
(Afghanistan). 
Frescoes (5th and 
6th century) restored 
during the 1970s 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

A city-state and trading crossroads, the city is 
also the religious capital of the empire, associated 
with the god Ashur. Over the centuries, all 
of Assyria identified with this universal god, 
creator of paradise and the underworld. The city, 
destroyed by the Babylonians in 612 BC, rose 
from its ashes in the Parthian period in the 1% and 
21d centuries AD. 
Ashur has kept many traces of its glorious past, 
including the ziggurat - a colossal temple-tower; 
the great temple of the god Ashur; the double 
temple of Ashur and Adad, the storm god; the 
temple of Ishtar, Sumerian goddess of love and 
war; the old palace with its royal tombs and 
several residential districts. 
When Ashur was proposed for inscription, 
before the war, the property was threatened by 
a project to build a large dam that would have 
partially flooded it. Although the project has been 
suspended by the current administration, there is 
always risk of a turnaround. 
This threat, compounded by a crying lack of 
protection, lay behind the site’s simultaneous 
inscription on the World Heritage List in Danger. 
According to observers who recently visited 
Ashur, the 20-odd guards in charge of supervising 
the roughly 65-hectare site no longer have arms 
and fear attacks by looters, who have proved very 
active on many other Iraqi sites. 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
ii 
Hi 
Li Wh Al 
== h er mr . 4] ) 
2 
q i | 
Vi ili 
v Airs SEER NS 
Wi Yi LE %\ ih hi ) 2 
   
   
   
   
: 
in : 
bla : 
ANN 
} { AG ih 
KEW, PARADISE WITH 
A PURPOSE 
Of a weekend Londoners flock to the immaculate 
lawns and treelined walks of the Royal Botanic 
Gardens, Kew, outside London, to picnic, stroll 
and admire the exceptional vegetation — Chinese 
rhododendrons, tropical palm trees and an infinite 
variety of flowers. Their itinerary includes two 
further landmarks: the Chinese pagoda and a 
stunning Victorian glass house. 
Herein undoubtedly lies the secret of Kew’s 
reputation: since their creation in 1759, these 
gardens have allied charm and elegance with 
scientific excellence. Inscription on the World 
Heritage List was justified on both counts. The 
gardens harbour botanic collections (conserved 
plants, living plants and documents), which 
have been considerably enriched through the 
centuries. They have made a significant and 
uninterrupted contribution to the study of plant 
diversity and botanic economics. As the World 
Conservation Union states, Kew is no ordinary 
garden because “it has truly blazed a trail by 
creating a world movement in favour of flora 
Its scientific work has had “a 
formidable cultural effect” because the botanical 
knowledge and skills acquired at Kew have been 
spread throughout the world. More recently, Kew 
set up the largest seed bank in the world. Located 
conservation.” 
i 
     
    
Above: The Victorian 
glasshouse in the 
Royal Botanic 
Gardens at Kew (UK). 
Right: The ancient 
city of Ashur (Iraq) 
has also been 
inscribed on the List 
of World Heritage 
in Danger 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O


  
UNESCO in action culture 
  in West Sussex, the Millennium Seed Bank aims 
to collect and conserve about ten percent of the 
world’s flora by 2010 - i.e. 24,000 species 
(http://www.rbgkew.org.uk) 
VALPARAISO, A LEGENDARY PORT 
Visitors rarely fall in love with Valparaiso at first 
site. The legislative capital of Chile (300,000 
inhabitants), also the country’s largest port, does 
not immediately reveal the magic that turned 
the city into a myth once sung by sailors from 
near and far. By inscribing the Historic Quarter 
of the Seaport City of Valparaiso on the World 
Heritage List, the Committee sought to honour 
this legendary port. 
The perimeter that was inscribed, located 
between the sea and the first line of hills, presents 
an interesting example of late 19'" century 
architecture and town-planning in Latin America. 
  
The Valparaiso port was founded by the Spaniards 
in the 16™ century on a narrow coastal plain then 
occupied by Chango Indians. Stretching along a 
natural bay on the Pacific coast that is shaped like 
an amphitheatre, the city expanded by climbing 
up the hillside. 
The port flourished in the 19" century, 
  
becoming a vital halt for sailors travelling from 
Europe to the west coast of the United States. 
      Before the construction of the Panama Canal in   the early 20™ century, ships were obliged to circle 
Cape Horn and travel up the Pacific coast. It was a 
perilous journey, which often ended in shipwreck   and death. Only the most fortunate set foot in 
Valparaiso, the first port on their route. The 
city’s legend has been woven with the dreams of  
sailors: of surviving and finding amusement in the © unesco 
alleys and taverns of the port city. 
Today the historic quarter has kept an attractive For European 
formal unity, dominated by belfries. The city sailors, reaching 
has also kept various structures from the a leading role in the slave trade until the end of Valparaiso (Chile) 
beginning of the industrial era, notably the famed the 18™ century. It was one of the main stopovers meant surviving 
“cable-cars” that screech and scream their way for women and men captured inland before their the treacherous 
up to the heights. voyage of no return to Europe and the New World. ~~ Cape Horn 
The fort’s strategic position made it the subject of 
REMEMBERING THE SLAVE TRADE bitter disputes. It was destroyed and rebuilt several 
In the Republic of The Gambia, James Island and times before being abandoned in 1829. 
Related Sites recall the meeting between Africa When the slave trade was abolished, James 
and Europe along the river that gives its name to Island was used to stop illicit slave traders. 
this small country surrounded by Senegal. From It is now one of The Gambia’s main tourist 
the 15 century, European traders fought tooth destinations, drawing mainly Europeans and Afro- 
and nail to draw profit from this passageway to Americans. 
the wealth of West Africa. Built in 1655 on a 3,000 Related sites testify to the long history of Afro- 
m- island in the middle of the river, the fort played = European relations: Fort Bullen on the north bank 
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003

  
Ruins of the fort 
on James Island 
(The Gambia), which 
was one of the main 
ports of call on the 
Slave Route 
of the river, the French West Africa Company’s 
building constructed in 1847, the remains of the 
old colonial village of San Domingo, the battery 
of six cannons in the capital Banjul, and the 
Portuguese chapel in the Mandingo village of 
Juffureh, where Alex Haley, the author of the 
novel “Roots,” located the origins of his ancestor 
Kunta Kinteh. 
THE LOST WORLD OF BUNGLE 
BUNGLE 
Located in the state of Western Australia, 
Purnululu National Park (239,723 hectares) 
harbours the rugged, beehive shaped Bungle 
Bungle mountain range, a prized destination 
for lovers of nature and wild spaces. The name 
probably stems from the Aborigine word “bundle 
bundle”, which designates a common local grass. 
“Purnululu” means “piles of sand” in the same 
language. These sandstone mounds formed 
over 350 million years ago make the region 
of Kimberley — one of the most remote in the 
country - so distinctive. 
Rivers and streams flowing from mountains 
in the south and east carried a mixture of sand 
and boulders that gradually consolidated to form 
sandstone. Uplift and erosion during the last 20 
million years created the deep gorges, spectacular 
towers, steep beehive-shaped cones and a surface 
marked by regular horizontal bands of silica and 
lichen. 
The park, inhabited by indigenous populations 
for over 20,000 years, is rich in Aboriginal art 
and harbours several burial sites. There are also 
numerous plant species of which some were 
discovered so recently they have not yet been 
given scientific names. Surprising fan palm 
trees grip precariously to walls and crevices in 
the rocks. The rest of the park is covered by a 
blanket of red and yellow sand where a wide 
array of trees and shrubs grow. Bird lovers can 
also observe over 130 species, including flocks of 
vividly coloured budgerigars. 
Sophie Boukhari 
www.calm.wa.gov.au/national_parks/ 
previous_parks_month/purnululul.html 
  
UNESCO | the new Courier | October 2003 
© 
U
N
E
S
C
O
 
 
