New frontiers
The United Nations Literacy Decade will promote 
action for literacy everywhere and for all, especially  
those left behind by national education systems
The United Nations Literacy Decade, 
launched in February, and 
coordinated by UNESCO, will focus 
on reducing the number of adults and youths who 
cannot read and write.
These are the people whose national education 
systems have failed to reach, despite literacy being 
recognized as a human right more than half a 
century ago.
“It is a scandal that this right continues to be 
violated for such a large proportion of humanity,” 
said Ayogi Shigeru, chief of literacy at UNESCO.
The decade will bring to the fore the current 
debate about what exactly illiteracy is, how it can be 
measured and how it should be tackled. 
The new thinking as espoused by adult literacy 
experts such as Alan Rogers of Nottingham 
University and David Archer, head of education at 
ActionAid, an NGO, is that it is the continuing use 
of literacy that should be measured rather than its 
acquisition at one point.
They also advocate removing key barriers to 
learning such as the imposition of alienating 
teaching methods or even alien literacies on people 
by their own societies.
For instance, a significant obstacle to both 
literacy and development for the poorer non-English 
speaking people in Orissa, eastern India, is being 
lifted by the state government’s decision to abolish 
the use of English in government forms used to 
apply for drought rations and low-income subsidies. 
Instead they will use the state language, Oriya.
Increasingly government donors and aid agencies 
are tying literacy programmes to the eradication of 
poverty, rooting learning in the use of literacy in 
activities critical to people’s lives, to maximize their 
An ActionAid adult literacy 
programme in Uganda. The new 
thinking is that learning should 
be rooted in activities critical 
to people’s lives to maximize its 
impact 
© UNESCO/Brendan O’Malley

ln Bangladesh, a 
shepherd does his ss 
homework
motivation and the impact of the skills acquired. 
There is also a growing recognition that learning 
and texts must be adapted to the particular needs 
and interests of individual villages. 
 “Governments and teachers, literacy facilitators 
and project managers, should all think seriously 
about providing learner-centred tailor-made learning 
that is sensitive to the culture and language of the 
learners,” said Aoyagi. 
Similarly, schools targeting children in the poorest 
communities, where parents may be illiterate and 
children are often needed to work during the day, 
can adapt their timetable and methods to surmount 
the obstacles to children attending lessons.
An international plan of action on literacy has 
been drawn up by UNESCO for the Decade with the 
aim of achieving the international goal set in 2000 of 
raising literacy rates by 50 percent by 2015. 
With the Food and Agriculture Organisation,  for 
example, UNESCO launched a flagship programme 
last November to promote basic literacy in 
rural areas where learning is linked to people’s 
livelihoods as a tool to acquire and use knowledge 
on health, income-generation, small-scale credit, the 
empowerment of women, environmental degradation 
and other issues the learners want to pursue.
UNESCO has promoted this model in a host of 
Asian countries, including Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, 
Indonesia and Thailand. “These are multi-purpose 
learning centres that provide helpful education to 
villagers, where they can learn at any time, at any 
level according to their needs,” Aoyagi said.
Through the Asia Pacific Programme of Education 
for All, UNESCO is providing know-how on how 
to establish CLCs, design teaching methods and 
curricula, and train local learning facilitators 
(guides). 
The aim is to show donors that CLCs can produce 
tangible results and that, because they are owned 
and run by and for the community they serve, they 
can become self-sustaining.
Brendan O’Malley
© Tapas Barua, Bangladesh/provided by the Asia Pacific Cultural Centre
