SCIENTIST OF
     THE SENSES
Christine Petit, 
2004 Laureate of the 
L’ORÉAL/UNESCO Awards 
For Women in Science, 
discusses the impact of 
her research on the deaf 
community and the slippery 
slope of eugenics 
The new Courier: How has your perception of 
deafness changed after your discovery of the genes 
responsible for this condition? 
Christine Petit: I no longer think of deafness in the 
singular but rather as “deafnesses” comprising 
different conditions with different consequences. 
A child born deaf will certainly encounter many 
difficulties. But with proper support, he or she 
will lead a happy and rich life. Yet for an adult 
whose life is built around oral communication, 
the suffering and anxiety from hearing loss is so 
severe that it leads to isolation. 
■ The Institut Pasteur just signed an agreement 
allowing a company to use your research to screen 
newborns for hereditary deafness. A similar test 
could be developed before birth or prenatally. Are we 
heading down the slippery slope of eugenics?
When I began this research in 1992, I thought we 
were sheltered from this problem. There appeared 
to be about 100 genes linked to deafness and so 
the chances were slim of quickly developing a 

Christine Petit in her 
office at the Institut 
Pasteur (France).

diagnostic test. So I will never forget the shock 
when we realized in 1997 that a single gene 
was responsible for almost half the cases of 
childhood deafness. On top of that, 70 percent 
of problems linked to this gene were caused 
by a single mutation. This is a small gene and 
therefore easy to test for. Technically, it is possible 
to test prenatally. So I immediately asked for the 
opinion of the French National Committee for 
Ethics, which found that deafness alone does not 
threaten human dignity and therefore doesn’t 
justify terminating a pregnancy. 
■ But what do you think about screening embryos 
for deafness? In July 2003, it was reported that a 
couple who carry a gene that causes deafness had 
their in vitro fertilized embryos screened at a fertility 
clinic in Australia. Apparently, this was the first 
time any clinic in the world screened embryos for 
a non-threatening condition. 
We have been working with a genetic counselor 
to help families with hearing loss deal with the 
diagnostic tools that we might develop. This 
counselor, a pediatrician, actually grew up in 
close contact with people with hearing problems 
and doesn’t view deafness simply as a handicap. 
At this point, only four families have requested 
prenatal screening but they were also at risk of 
transmitting serious illnesses. The real problem 
lies in screening embryos created by in vitro 
fertilization because this means we would be 
heading towards embryo selection [and the notion 
of “designer babies”]. 
■ How has the deaf community responded 
to your research?
In the beginning, I was warned that the 
community would block our work out of fear 
that our research would lead to eugenic practices 
and the “eradication of deafness”, which some 
people consider a culture. We never encountered 
this resistance maybe because we explained 
our methods and objectives. On the contrary, I 
think people faced with progressive deafness are 
following our work with great hope.
Anything but
a petite contribution
Famous for her research 
on the senses, Christine 
Petit (of France) 
identified the one gene 
responsible for more 
than half of all cases of 
congenital deafness. 
She has also identified 
the gene responsible for 
Kallman syndrome, the 
only hereditary disease 
causing a total loss of 
the sense of smell. 
Professor Petit is the 
Head of the Genetics of 
Sensory Deficiencies 
Unit at Institut Pasteur. 
In 2002, she became a 
member of the French 
Academy of Sciences 
and the fifth woman to 
be named Professor at 
the Collège de France.

■ For some, deafness is more a culture than 
a handicap. What do you think?
Young people born deaf often form real 
communities, structured around a shared 
language, which is sign language. In the name of 
this language, some want recognition of a distinct 
culture. I think this claim stems in large part from 
the history of the deaf and the abuses by those 
who can hear. Remember that not so long ago 
sign language was forbidden and there were the 
forced sterilizations during the Second World War. 
Then there was the false hope raised by hearing 
aids, as deaf people were told, “Your problems are 
solved!” But in the beginning, these devices were 
very rudimentary and didn’t provide the promised 
improvements.
■ Do you feel any responsibilities towards 
this community? 
Yes, to inform people about our discoveries 
and to do everything possible to bridge the gap 
between testing for deafness and treating it. To do 
this, we need basic research into the molecular 
mechanisms of the inner ear’s functions. 
■ Some people don’t like the idea of specifically 
recognizing women scientists like the L’ORÉAL-
UNESCO prize. What do you think?
If women’s science awards were to spring up 
everywhere, like in sports, this prize would simply 
recognize the differences in scientific performance 
between men and women. Obviously, this is not my
understanding of the L’ORÉAL-UNESCO prize. On 
the contrary, I think it is a wonderful idea, mainly 
because it is attributed to a woman from each 
continent. The prize bears a universal message 
concerning the advancement of women – progress 
Christine Petit is one 
of the five laureates 
of the 2004 L’ORÉAL-
UNESCO “For Women 
in Science” Awards. 
Selected by a jury of 15 
eminent members of the 
scientific community, 
each of the laureates, 
from a different region, 
will receive $100,000 
for their outstanding 
research contributions 
and their determination 
to champion the cause 
of women in science. 
Professor Petit is joined 
by: Jennifer Thomson 
(South Africa), for 
her development of 
transgenic plants 
resistant to viral 
infections, drought 
and other risks; Nancy 
Ip (China), for her 
discoveries on the 
molecular control of 
growth, differentiation 
and synapse formation 
in the nervous system; 
Lucia Mendonça 
Previato (Brazil), for 
her achievements in 
the understanding, 
treatment and 
prevention of Chagas 
disease; Philippa 
Marrack (U.S.), for 
her characterization 
of the functions 
of T lymphocytes 
in immunity and 
the discovery of 
superantigens.
The L’ORÉAL-
UNESCO Women in 
Science Program is a 
unique public-private 
partnership designed 
to recognize the 
achievements of women 
scientists and raise 
the profile of women 
in science globally. In 
addition to the awards, 
about 15 young female 
researchers are given 
fellowships each year 
to continue their work 
abroad. Created in 
1998, the program 
has awarded 31 prizes 
and 60 fellowships to 
women pursuing both 
the life and physical 
sciences in 45 countries.
Awards “for 
women in science”

Topleft: Jennifer 
Thomson (South 
Africa).
Bottomleft: Nancy Ip 
(Hong-Kong).
Topright: Philippa 
Marrack (USA).
Bottomright: Lucia 
Mendonça Previato 
(Brazil).

gained not just through the access to knowledge 
but also through the act of creating knowledge 
at the highest level. This message gains continuity 
through the fellowships awarded the young 
women researchers.
■ What do you think of affirmative action, like 
quota systems, to try to remove the barriers facing 
women in science?
By recognizing how institutional structures and 
rules affect women, we wouldn’t need affirmative 
action. For example, to pursue a high-level 
scientific career in France, you are supposed to 
direct a group of researchers by the age of 40. Yet 
this is when most women have young children. 
With a bit of flexibility in the system, we wouldn’t 
reject women trying to balance their professional 
and family lives. We need to pay this same kind of 
attention when handing out promotions in order 
to detect the disparities between men and women 
and to analyze the reasons behind them. 
■ What kind of barriers have you 
encountered?
Years ago, when I told my research director 
that I was pregnant, I got a violent response. 
No one would dare respond like that today. Yet 
we must remain vigilant. We still have a long 
way to go. Men and women are only starting to 
share the highest level of responsibilities and 
decision-making. We have made progress but 
it is not irreversible. Who knows if we won’t 
slip backwards in the future. At the same time, 
I think that every woman feels the injuries 
and humiliations suffered by women in some 
countries.
 
■ Some people suggest that research priorities 
might change with more women in science. 
What do you think?
Who knows? Would military research be such 
a priority? Is there such a thing as masculine or 
feminine research? Clearly, the brain is sexed, like 
any other organ, but not “scientific truth”. It is 
likely that differences in physiology and cultural 
perceptions of the world lead men and women to 
different scientific questions and methods. 
In any case, I dream of a world shaped by 
masculine and feminine creativity, where these 
differences are not only respected but considered 
complementary and mutually beneficial. 

Jennifer Thomson 
in the field: 
inspecting seed 
corn with farmers 
in South Africa
