THE UNIVERSAL 
ISLAND AND THE 
ISLAND UNIVERSE
Louis Brigand, professor of geography at the University 
of Brest (France) and curator of the Iroise Nature 
Reserve explains why much of what is essential about 
a small island is the same in Brittany, where he lives 
and works, as it is in the South Pacific
What is the definition of an island?
There are almost as many definitions as there are islands. 
The most basic definition is “land surrounded by water 
on all sides”. But international organisations don’t always 
use the same criteria. For one it might be the area, for 
another how far it is from the continent, whether or not it 
is inhabited, the number of inhabitants. For the European 
Community if there is a capital city on an island it is no 
longer considered an island. 
And from a biologist’s point of view, the summit of a 
mountain, a cow-pat or a clearing in a forest are also islands. 
Some geographers even go so far as to say that Earth is an 
island in the universe. 
Is isolation an important part of the definition?
It’s essential. All the definitions mention it, whether the 
isolation is geographical, economic, political, or cultural, 
etc. Filmmakers, artists, the military, and religions are all 
interested in islands. They are places to find oneself. And it’s 
North Male Atoll 
(Maldives)
Top right: The 
Galapagos Islands 
are famous for species 
not found anywhere 
else, like this iguana

It can be a long walk 
to get fresh water 
on Cape Verde. But on 
some islands there’s 
none to be had at all© 

there that hermitages have been built – as well 
as prisons. These are the classical functions of 
islands, linked to isolation. 
Is insularity the same everywhere 
in the world?
Even on the little islands of Brittany we can find 
everything that characterises insularity elsewhere. 
There are the same problems, whatever the 
latitude. There’s a problem of freshwater on the 
Isle of Molène – even if it rains a lot there.
Small island states have often progressively 
acquired their status by separating from 
a continental state. Sometimes, in certain 
archipelagos, each island has tried to become 
independent. And all the little islands in Brittany 
have joined together in an association that has 
been running for 25 years (the isles of Ponant) 
with a fairly substantial budget. It’s also one way 
to have a voice with respect to the State and to 
the continent.
Are there different types of island?
From a geographical point of view there are 
two main categories. There is the volcanic 
island, that appears relatively suddenly, and the 
pre-continental island, which is due to a rise 
or fall in the level of the water, or because of 
fragmentation. These are parts of the continent 
that have become isolated at a point in geological 
history. The great volcanic islands are found along 
the Atlantic and Pacific ridges. It’s interesting that 
on volcanic islands there is a different way of 
organising space. There is the cone and the steep 
slopes. Often the roads go around the island and 
not so much up and down. And these islands are 
often part of an archipelago. 
Is an island still an island if there 
is a bridge? 
For me it’s a break with one of the most 
significant components of what makes an island. 
On all the little islands near to the continent, even 
those that are a few dozen metres away, the fact 
that there is a barrier of water changes everything. 
And there are other kinds of bridge that we don’t 
often think about. There is electricity, for example, 
where the underwater cable forms a bridge. Then 
there is drinking water. A pipeline to an island 
from the mainland will completely change the way 
people think about using water, and its scarcity, 
compared to when they have to find ways to get 
it. There is an impluvium on Molène and almost 
every house has a rainwater tank.
Arriving on an island by bridge is frustrating, 
too. The time to get from the continent to the 
island, whether by plane or by boat, makes all 
the difference. We’re always trying to find quicker 
ways to get to an island, but I’m not convinced 
that’s what people really want. They’re not 
particularly interested in gaining 15 minutes on 
the crossing – they even usually enjoy it.
Islands are important to mariners 
aren’t they? 
When I look at old maps, one of the things that 
always strikes me is to see that the islands are 
always represented and that their size is often 
exaggerated. This is a sign of their importance for 
the mariner. 
For the mariner an island is the first land he 
sees before striking the continent and, when 
leaving, it is the last. An island is both a source 
of danger and safety, a haven in which to rest, 
to find provisions, perhaps even a woman.
The Sally Lightfoot 
crab is specially 
adapted to resist the 
rough conditions 
of the Galapagos 
Islands
▲
For more than 
25 years Louis 
Brigand has been 
researching, 
teaching and writing 
about small islands 
– a love affair that 
began when, as a 
teenager, he’d go 
looking for rabbits 
on the uninhabited 
island of Beniguet, 
in the Iroise sea 
(France)

Why do scientists find islands 
interesting? 
There are hundreds of things to study on all 
small islands, even the tiniest islets. For example, 
biologists may look at endemic species, or those 
that have been isolated and thus don’t have the 
same characteristics as those on the continent. 
Sociologists might look at populations, because 
they, too, will have traits that have been preserved 
because of isolation. And botanists will look at 
the ways plants adapt to certain specific climatic 
conditions. 
On the islands off Brittany, for example, there are 
a great many things of interest to archaeologists, 
because the ground may not have been worked 
intensively, or there may have been no dense 
habitation. Even on the little islets, we see that 
nation as a result of sea level rise. 
“We couldn’t just sit back and do nothing,” 
Panapase told me, as we sat in a small office 
in the one-storey white-painted building which 
houses most of Tuvalu’s national government. “So 
far we have received approval from New Zealand 
to allow seventy-five people a year to go there.” 
This is not an ‘evacuation’, he insisted, but more 
of a ‘migration plan’. Either way, Tuvalu’s 11,300 
inhabitants are about to start leaving their homes.
“We don’t know what will happen in the future,” 
he said. “We may lose our culture, and our identity 
as Tuvaluans. It will take time for our people to 
accept that, once we’re in another country.” 
FLOODING FROM BELOW
The following day, just as the evening shadows 
were lengthening from the coconut and pandanus 
trees that line Funafuti atoll’s shore, puddles 
began to appear around the airstrip. Water had 
begun welling up through small holes in the 
ground, as the high tide forced seawater up 
through the centre of the island. This is why 
building sea walls around atolls like Tuvalu is 
pointless – coral rock is porous, so the islands 
almost all scientific disciplines can be applied. 
And also, as an island is surrounded by water, 
the smaller it is, the more it is subjected to 
the forces of erosion and currents. And so the 
coastline can change much more significantly 
than on the continent. So they become very 
interesting places to study phenomena that are 
affecting the planet as a whole. 
It’s no accident that many islands are protected 
by conservation laws, like nature reserves and 
biosphere reserves.
Do you have a favourite island?
I try not to put them on a scale. And after all, 
the most beautiful islands are imaginary, aren’t 
they? 
