More than one million 
species could disappear 
as a result of climate 
change expected to take 
place by 2050. 
UNESCO speaks with 
Chris Thomas, lead 
author of the most 
comprehensive study on 
this looming crisis
The new Courier: What sets this study apart from 
the rest?
Chris Thomas: For a number of years, scientists have been 
chatting about whether species might be driven to extinction 
by climate warming. But for the first time, we have asked 
how many species on Earth are going to be or might be lost 
to global warming. Perhaps the most important thing we’ve 
done is to put together a framework to analyze the problem 
and even to suggest that it is possible to analyze it. 
Did you encounter any political resistance, perhaps 
when applying for funding?
There wasn’t any resistance because there wasn’t any 
funding for the collaboration. We just did it. About two years 
ago, the IUCN (World Conservation Union) sponsored a 
couple of workshops to discuss the impact of climate change 
on conservation. A group of us got talking and before long 
we had a network of teams around the world that were 
already building databases on species patterns in their own 
countries. There was funding in the sense that our salaries 
were paid. But there was no money to collect or analyze 
the data. 



NOWHERE TO RUN
© 
O
liv
ie
r 
La
ng
ra
nd
/C
on
se
rv
at
io
n 
In
te
rn
at
io
na
l
Left: Under threat, 
The King Protea, 
South Africa’s 
national flowers.
Right: For Professor 
Chris Thomas, 
species rarely evolue 
quickly enough to 
adapt to climate 
change.

You describe the report’s findings as “terrifying”. Yet aren’t 
these figures underestimates because the study didn’t 
include habitation loss due to deforestation, for example?
We thought about trying to include that but we soon ran into 
problems over both the quality and comparability of data for 
land use in different parts of the world. There was nothing 
wrong with any of the studies but they were done in slightly 
different ways. We didn’t have the time or the resources to 
spend the many months required to get all of the data in the 
same format. 
It would be extremely desirable now to put together some 
international funding to project the combined effect of 
changes from climate and land use.
Are we talking about the next wave of massive 
extinctions comparable to that caused in the past by 
volcanoes or asteroids?
There are the so-called Big Five extinctions, the best known 
being the event that wiped out the dinosaurs. Even for 
these mass extinctions, we don’t know how many of the 
extinctions occurred by the initial triggering event - be it 
the impact of meteorites or volcanic explosions - and how 
many were caused by climatic fluctuations that immediately 
followed. 
There were also quite a lot of smaller extinction events. 
What we are doing with greenhouse gases, in combination 
with habitat destruction, will certainly put us at par with 
one of those events. The question is whether it will rank 
alongside the Big Five. It doesn’t have to happen, but it 
could. 
Why didn’t we see this looming crisis sooner?
One has to take an international perspective, and it is not 
that easy to put together international-scale studies. For 
example, you can have an excellent detailed study on how 
species might disappear or spread in Britain. But you need 
the international perspective to see that some species won’t 
have anywhere to run.  
Our report is about as dry as we could make it. Yet many 
people said, ‘Oh! You’re being very alarmist.’ In fact, they are 
alarmed by the numbers reported. So am I.
How do you respond to the naysayers of climate 
change? 
The naysayers are having a disproportionately loud voice. 
Like so many issues in the media, you get reports that have 
one person defending an argument and another tearing it 
down for the sake of supposed balance, despite the fact 

that more than 99% of experts believe one view and only 
a small fraction of a percent believe the second view. We 
have simply built on what the vast majority of climatologists 
are saying.  That does not mean that there are no great 
uncertainties, which the climatologists acknowledge. 
We are not in a state of fiction, imagining the possible 
future. In this study, we are fast-forwarding the phenomena 
already observed to be underway. The rising temperatures 
of the past 30 to 40 years clearly indicate the signature of 
anthropogenic climate warming. We know this has affected 
the distribution of plants and animals across the world. 
Some people criticize your report by arguing that animals 
and plants will adapt to climate change.
Of course they can. But very rarely can species evolve far 
and fast enough, especially with rapid climate change. The 
absolute overwhelming evidence shows that as the climate 
changes – be it in the past 30 years or far back in geological 
time – species do not to stay put and adapt. They move. 
If you are an animal or plant and the climate starts to 
change, you may start to adapt. But your population will still 
decline if you don’t have enough genetic variation to evolve 
and keep up with the rate of environmental change. In the 
meantime, let’s say a competing species arrives, which is 
better adapted to the new environment. You lose. 
In recent years, there has been considerable debate 
as to whether conservation agencies should focus on 
protecting biodiversity hotspots, or areas exceptionally 
rich in unique plant and animal species. You go beyond this 
and take conservation into the arena of greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
It must be said, without a hint of criticism in my voice, that 
the conservation agencies have put more effort on treating 
the symptoms of what is happening to biodiversity rather 
Greenhouse ghosts
than removing the causes, because the ultimate causes are so 
difficult to deal with. The only viable conservation strategy, 
in the face of climate change, is for everyone concerned to 
start putting immense pressure on politicians so that we end 
up with one of the least damaging climate scenarios, rather 
than one of the worst.
The golden toad in Monteverde in Costa Rica is the perfect 
example. Here was a species living on top of a mountain 
in an entirely protected area. Every last one of these frogs 
disappeared after the recent drought and the lifting of cloud 
levels.
I personally think that these biodiversity hotspots might 
be in particular risk of extinction for two reasons. First, they 
contain lots of species in a relatively small area. And if they 
are asked to move, it is less likely the future distribution will 
resemble the current one. 
Second, remember that for the last 10,000 years, we 
have been in the warm phase of an ice age. In fact, we are 
experiencing one of the warmest moments in the last million 
years. Now we see a lot of species living in these so-called 
hotspots. Not all of my colleagues would agree but I think 
many of these species and environments are likely to have 
been more widespread when the climate was cooler. The 
plants and animals have managed to hang on, to survive, by 
concentrating in very small and unique environments. 
What happens if we drive up the temperature during one 
of the warmest moments in the last million years? Imagine a 
small tropical mountain like Monteverde, with some species 
found only right near the top. 15,000 years ago, they would 
have lived further down. If the climate becomes substantially 
warmer, they might get pushed off the top. There’s nowhere 
left to go. 
A
ccording to a new study
 led by Chris Thomas, 
professor of conservation 
biology at Leeds University, 
climate change is expected 
to drive a quarter of land 
animals and plants into 
extinction. More than 
one million species could 
disappear.
Thomas and his team, 
reportedly the largest global 
collaboration of experts to 
study this problem, focused 
on six biodiversity-rich 
regions around the world 
representing 20% of the 
planet’s land area. They 
began by considering how 
three different scenarios 
from the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change 
would change the habitats of 
1103 plants, mammals, birds, 
reptiles, frogs, butterflies and 
other invertebrates. They 
then evaluated the ability of 
each species to either adapt 
or move to a more suitable 
area. In the mid-range 
forecast, 15 to 37% of species 
studied would be extinct. 
At the high end, as many as 
58% could disappear. In the 
best of the three scenarios, 
we would lose at least 9% of 
species.

You predict that entire biological communities will 
disappear. Have we seen this before?
Not on a global scale in recent history. We are causing a 
major extinction event. Does it matter? From a scientific 
perspective, we know that in the past it has taken millions 
of years before biodiversity recovered from mass extinctions. 
Anyone concerned about the environment is likely to be 
worried by this.
But we should not think that climate change will only 
affect biodiversity. Last summer in France, it was estimated 
that more than 15,000 people died because of the heat wave. 
In the second half of this century, we could be talking about 
hundreds of millions of people displaced by flooding in delta 
areas around the world. 
What is good for biodiversity, is likely also to be good 
for people – at least in the long run. The normal argument 
that some economists put up is, ‘Well, we cannot afford to 
change all of our technologies and hinder the growth of our 
carbon-based economies.” Well, Britain signed the Kyoto 
Protocal, even though that is a very minor first step, and has 
been one of the better international players on this issue. 
Quoting from Sir David King, UK’s Chief Science Advisor, 
between 1990 and 2000, UK greenhouse gas emissions fell 
by 12% while the economy grew by 30% and employment 
rose by just under 5%. Remember that the UK has been 
competing with other economies with fewer controls in 
place. There is no other route, at least in the long run.

Above: Gone forever, 
the golden toad of 
Monteverde (Costa Rica), 
became extinct after a 
prolonged drought
Right: From tropical 
Queensland (Australia), 
the Boyd lezard-dragon 
is equipped with an 
internal thermostat and is 
particularly vulnerable to 
climate change
