
What is the idea behind School Feeding?
James Morris:  Every child should have at least one good meal 
every day and there is nothing more important in any person’s 
life than education. Providing a school meal is a powerful 
incentive for a child to attend school, and a good way to see 
a child has a good meal every day. It also offers opportunities 
to do other things of enormous value for a child. For example, 
it gives the World Health Organisation the opportunity to offer 
medicine that can eliminate worms from a child’s system. 
Having a child in school is the most powerful way to offer 
HIV/AIDS education. 
What is the link between education and nutrition?
JM:  A hungry person has no ability to think or do physical 
work, and anyone’s success, day by day, is related to their 
capacity to do physical work and ability to think. We know 
that a child’s being well fed makes all the difference in the 
world. Food for Education is a powerful vehicle. Teachers say 
if there was a distribution of food the week before, children 



“A HUNGRY PERSON
CAN’T THINK OR WORK”
Empty stomachs 
are not conducive 
to learning.This 
simple observation 
sparked the School 
Feeding programme. 
James Morris, 
Executive Director 
of the World Food 
Programme, hopes it 
will eventually feed 
50 milllion pupils 
In Afghanistan, 
after the Taliban’s 
departure,
distribution of food 
at school helped 
significantly
increase the number 
of children enrolled, 
particularly girls

are bright and alert. If they are not fed, they pass out at school 
and vitality in the classroom is substantially diminished.
What is the scale of hunger?
JM:  We believe there are 840m hungry people in the world, at 
least 300m of them children. It’s likely half of hungry children 
don’t go to school -- and most of them are girls. If a girl can go 
to school and be fed, her life changes for the better in many 
ways. She will delay her child-bearing years until she is 20, 
instead of 12 or 13; she will have two or three children instead 
of seven or eight, and different expectations, aspirations for 
them. She will be a better mother, better citizen, teacher, 
entrepreneur, farmer -- whatever she chooses she will do it 
better, be more successful as a human being and economically. 
A very small investment in a child, especially a girl, has an 
enormous future payoff.
Where are children hungriest?
JM:.  In Africa there are a couple of hundred million. There 
are 50-60 million in Latin America, 150 million in South-East 
Asia. Many countries have intense pockets of poverty and often 
when that is the case children are most affected. In Guatemala 
46% of children under five are chronically malnourished; and 
39% in Honduras. There are School Feeding programmes in 69 
countries, and the schools are everywhere – though more likely 
in rural communities.
How does the School Feeding Programme work? 
JM:  Where the WFP is working, UNESCO and other UN 
agencies will be present, so we can bring all services together 
through the schools. We often work with [international] NGOs 
such as World Vision, Save the Children, Care, Oxfam, Mercy 
Corps, and with local government and community leaders, 
NGOs, parents’ groups. Our job is generally to see the money 
is available to procure the food, transport it in or buy it locally, 
and then it is often prepared and distributed by NGOs, parents’ 
or local school groups. I have seen places where parents rapidly 
learn to prepare highly nourishing meals. In Afghanistan we 
supported 280 bakeries to produce loaves for children. Clearly, 
education and health ministries are critically important. About 
20 countries have “graduated” from the programme, but we 
will always be there to help if needed. Often we try to deliver 
emergency food assistance through schools; in a crisis kids 
often stop going to school.
Do teachers also receive food? 
JM:  These are decisions made by local school boards, but 
clearly teachers are key to the success of this programme and 
there are places where we provide food as interim short-term 
compensation for teachers. When Afghanistan didn’t have cash 
to pay for teachers, we paid them in food.
What results have the programmes had? 
JM:  We know school feeding has a powerful impact on 
the percentage of children going to school, and going on to 
secondary school. In Pakistan it has tripled the number of 
girls attending school. We have seen substantial progress in 
Bangladesh and Honduras.
One of the first places I visited was Dodoma in Tanzania where 
the number of children going to school rose from 400 to 800 
and the percentage of kids going on to secondary school rose 
from 8% to 22%. There was a Kabul school with 1,500 boys 
and no girls; after the Taliban, and with introduction of the 
School Food Programme, there were 3,200 pupils -- 1,700 boys 
and 1,500 girls.
In North Korea the results are remarkable. These are not 
necessarily related to school feeding, but between 1998 and 
2002 we were feeding millions of children and our nutritional 
survey shows the percentage of underweight children fell from 
60% to 20%. The acutely malnourished went down from 16% 
to 9%; and chronically malnourished from 60% to 40%. It’s 
still way too high, but it is an extraordinary example of the 
impact of therapeutic feeding on children’s lives.
▲

talking to
What are UNESCO and other agencies doing?
JM:  Development in humanitarian work is guided by the 
commitment to Millennium Development goals: reducing 
hunger and poverty, infant mortality, HIV/AIDS; improving 
maternal health, gender equality, universal primary education, 
the environment; strengthening democratic institutions. I 
believe hunger, food security and nutrition are at the basis 
of all these -- there will be no progress if people are not well 
nourished. If you address hunger and malnutrition, lives can 
turn around overnight. 
Who funds the programme? How much does it cost to feed 
children?
JM:  We have donor countries and private individuals, 
companies and NGOs who have contributed specifically to the 
School Feeding Programme. Thirty euros a year can provide a 
meal for a child every school day – about 200 days a year. We 
aspire to feed 50 million children. 
What are the difficulties? 
JM:  There are challenges. We often have to provide kitchen 
facilities and utensils, get the programme started and make 
sure it has nutritional strength to benefit a child, and over the 
long term to see the government and local community take 
over the programme. We have a special effort now in nine 
Sahelian countries [Burkino Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Gambia, 
Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, which face common 
difficulties such as desertification, water shortage, deforestation, 
▼
A
t 
a 
gl
an
ce
For James Morris, 
the fight against 
hunger is at the heart 
of all humanitarian 
causes
James Morris: Between business and humanitarian work
◗ Named Executive 
Director of the 
United Nations 
World Food 
Programme in 
April 2002, James 
T. Morris oversees 
the world’s 
largest food aid 
organization,
which last year fed 
104 million people 
in 81 countries with 
new contributions 
totalling
US$2.6 billion.
◗ WFP reaches out 
to hungry people 
who cannot help 
themselves – victims 
of war and natural 
disasters, families 
affected by HIV/AIDS 
and orphans who 
have lost their
parents to the 
pandemic, and 
school children in 
poor communities.
◗ In July 2002, 
Mr Morris was 
appointed UN 
Secretary-General
Kofi Annan’s
Special Envoy for 
Humanitarian Needs 
in Southern Africa, a 
region which
continues to be 
gripped by a major 
food emergency.
In 2003, he
successfully guided 
the World Food 
Programme in 
carrying out the 
largest
humanitarian
operation in history, 
feeding 27 million 
Iraqis.
◗ Mr Morris, a native 
of the United States, 
earned his BA in 
Political Science from 
Indiana University 
and MBA from 
Butler University. 
After serving in 
city government in 
Indianapolis, Indiana, 
he moved to the Lilly 
Endowment, Inc., 
one of the world’s 
largest charitable 
foundations, in 
1973. Mr Morris 
then became 
chairman and chief 
executive officer 
of IWC Resources 
Corporation and 
Indianapolis Water 
Company in 1989.
◗ Among his 
philanthropic
activities, he has 
been affiliated with 
the United States 
Olympic Committee, 
the American Red 
Cross, and the Board 
of Trustees of Indiana 
University.

educational problems] where we have been working with the 
education and health ministries to bring in school feeding. 
Then there are children orphaned by HIV/AIDS. In sub-
Saharan Africa 11-14 million children orphaned by AIDS are 
in care of grandparents, or other children; these kids are less 
likely to go to school, will have poor health care and less 
adequate nutrition. Their number will rise to 20 million over 
the next few years. 
But the good news is that the WFP, UNESCO, UNICEF, UNAIDS 
and WHO are working hard to address these issues. We have 
rethought our programming, how to help governments and 
community organisations. UNAIDS says most important is to 
educate 5-to-15-year-olds; second, to prolong parents’ lives 
so they have more time with their children; third, addressing 
orphans’ needs. There are places that have lost teachers, health 
professionals, agricultural workers. All the antiretroviral drugs 
won’t make any difference without good food and clean water 
and people who can administer the programmes.
How are results monitored?
JM:  Our work is monitored and evaluated every day, in every 
place in the world, so we know the benefits. We have our own 
staff and outside people, including local governments in the 
community. Teachers, principals and parents have a good idea 
of our practices. (See Standardized Feeding Survey box.)
What next?
JM:  We are heavily focused on investigating where we are 
most needed, so we can target resources on the hungriest, 
poorest people There is nothing more important than feeding 
schoolchildren; food and education are the keys to their future. 
Interview by Jane Marshall
