
(-fciKerAK't; ^[AK-te
breadfruît (Arîoearpus aUUis)
Atree native to thé Malay archipelago, its fruit can be cooked
like a potato. Thé Poiynesians carned it to thé South Pacifie
istands. From Tahiti, Captain William Btigh took it to thé West
Indies in 1793 on thé Bounty, intended as food for slaves wbo
refused to eat it as it was totaiiy unknown to them in West
Afiica. It was oniy after thé end of slavery that breadfruit
appeared on Caribbean tables.
cassava (manioc) (BSanihol; escutenta)
This Braziiian vsgetabte with tubers boiled and baked . ".'
potatoes travelted on Portuguese ships to Africa. Msgrating
Sndians also transported them in their canoës îo thé Caribbean.
coBtofds (B*wssî®a atoracwe var. ooephaia)
One of thé earliest varwtws of thé cabbage family, said to hme
originated in thé Mediterranesti wgion, spread îo Asie and
Africa, fînally reaching thé Americas via ths slave trade. Today,
it is an ingrédient of "soûl food/' its dark green leaves usualiy
boiled with pork.
®ewpea (Vigna uroguîcutata)
A bean going back as far as thé prehistoric era either in India
or China, with Africa suggested as a possible source. Reached
thé Americas via thé slave trade and cultivat»d today in most
tropical and subtropical régions. Its best-known varisty is thé
biack-eyed bean, a common feature of southern cuisine in thé
United Statea.
W«st Indian gharkin (Cucumis anguria)
A native of tropical Africa, crossed into thé Amerteas in thé early
18th cantury throuflh thé slave trads. From there, it crossad tb«
Attantic orwe again towards Europe. Mostly used for ptektos.
matze (corn) (Zea mays)
Native to thé Americas, Columbus carried it to Spain. In thé 1Wi
century, Portuguese traders carried it ta East Africa and Asia,
Arab traders to North Africa. It reached Wsst Africa from thé
Caribbean, used on both sides of thé Attant're a» an inexpensive
means of provisioreng slav ships across thé Atlantic.
okra (Abelmaschus ®scutontu«)
Atso calted "gumbo, " although th» latter is at»o thé name of
a soup using okra as a main ingr»diant. Natrvs to Africa, wa«
grown by thé Egyptians, ttwn brought by Spanish Moors to
Europe in thé 12th century and introduced by riaves to thé
Americas in thé 17th.
resvMs il-ti ibi-sctts s'abdarWta!
Indian Océan to India and China. Used as grain and as a source
of syrup, several varieties of sorghums reached thé Americas
through thé slave trade.
taro (Colocasia esculenta)
Originated in South Asia, travelled to Egypt some 2, 000 years
ago, later introduced into Europe, from wherethe Spaniards
took it to thé New World. It marie its way ta West Africa from
there. Its starchytuber is cooked like potatoes.
watermeSen (CiîruSt'js . anaîus)
A vine cultivated for its fruit, this native of Africa reached thé
Middle East, EgYQt; India and Persit ) semé 6,000 yyars ago. Later
grown &y thé ancient Greeks and Romans, also by thé Chinese
in thé 'iûîh century AD. Ar'ived in iSurope via thé Spanish
Moore. then thé Americas via thé slave irade.
winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus)
A relative of thé cowpea, this vegetable's leaves, pods, seeds,
shoots and tubers are ail edible. Its origins are thought to be in
tndia or China, even Africa where it grows wild. Reached thé
Caribbean and South America via thé slave trade.
yeliow malanga (Xanthosoma atrovirens)
Grown for its corm which is cooked like a yam. Most probably
originated in South America, taken to thé Caribbean by thé
Taino. later reached West Africa from where it was used to feed
America-bound slaves. Also grown today in Asia and thé Pacifie.
Source: Thé Cambridge World History of Food
José Banaag
sorghum (Sorghum vulgare)
slave trade.
sésame (Sesamum indfeuiw)
Thc piant may hâve originated in East Africa or India, grown
for its oit some 5,000 years ago in thé valleys of thé Tigris and
Euphrates. Slave shtps carried th< seeds to thé New World.

Cuttivated in East Africa same 6,000 years ago, crosaed th<
