act
Thé people of Timbuktu in Mali used a suitcase radio donated by
UNESCO to battle thé hordes of locusts that destroyed a significant
percentage o f Mali's crops in 2004. Thé equipment helped
Community Multimédia Centres to reach and involve commnnities
in thé vital stmggle against this blight.
Crops are left
devastated when
locusts invade
Thé suitcase radio bas enabled us to save
crops in thé plain around Timbuktu,"
says Birama Diallo, of UNESCO's Community
Multimédia Centre pronject in Bamako, thé
capital of Mali. He explains that "it enabled us
to disseminate information about traditional
methods of fighting thé locusts that had been
forgotten because there had been no locust
attacks in so long. Thanks to thé suitcase radio
we hâve been able to reach everybody, including
nomads. " Thé last major invasion of locusts
occurred some 20 years ago, according to Diallo.
"Thé equipment was used to broadcast daily
crisis programmes, retransmitted on ail four radio
stations in Timbuktu, to tell people where to go
and to organize thé fight against thé invading
swarms, " explained radio technician Mahi Touré.
With few government resources available
for actions such as airborne surveillance and
spraying, Timbuktu had to rely on traditional
methods like smoking thé locusts out, beating
thé swarms with sticks and with traditional
boubou cloth. This requires thé participation of
many people. Thus thé mobile radio, which was
taken to thé anti-locust operational headquarters
run by thé authorities and even into thé fields
to broadcast live from thé local communities,
was essential in mobilizing thé necessary large
numbers.
Thé languages spoken in this cultural
crossroads include Tamacheq, Songhay, Peulh,
Arabie, French and Bambara, and radio provides
thé only effective means of ensuring urgent
information reaches ail communities in ail

UNESCO in action
Thé suitcase s-adio
makes it possible to
reach even ths most
remote coinmunitiss
For more information on
thé suitcase radio:
www. wantokent. com
For UNESCO's Community
Multimédia Centres:
http : //www. Unesco. org/
webworld/cmc
languages and is therefore understood by ail. It
also allows local peuple to participate, hâve their
say and share traditional knowledge - which has
proved vital in times of crisis.
"Old people explain thé traditional methods of
fighting thé locust hordes. We also broadcast calls
to mobilize thé villagers. Today, thé army and
thé youth of Timbuktu will be going out together
to fight thé swarms, " explained Mr Touré. Thé
spécial broadcasts linked up ail four radio stations
each day from 9 a. m. to 11 a. m. and from 10 p. m.
until midnight. "There has never been such an
effective way to reach ail thé people of our arca
before, " noted Mr Touré.
Thé radio presenters also used thé local
telecentre to obtain further information from thé
^oy-fc^ble. ̂ (d ue\/-<sA-fcl[&
Thé suitcase radio, a complète
broadcast station in a single case and
complète with a high gain antenna,
is a product of Wantok Enterprises in
Canada. It is designed ta be extremely
simple to use and to withstand harsh
conditions such as those of thé Sahara
désert. Thé unit is fully portable but
can also be used as a permanent FM
community radio station. Because of
its low-cost, easy-to-use advantage,
suitcase radio has been piloted in
several CMCs including in Mali,
Mozambique, Uganda, Niger, Burkina
Faso and Tanzania. Thé suitcase radio
cornes in 30 watt and 100 watt versions.
Internet. Thé suitcase radio was originally donated
by UNESCO under its Community Multimédia
Centre programme, to help radio stations make
optimal use of telecentre resources. Staff from
each station hâve been trained in web searching
and in producing "radio browsing" programmes
in which thé présenter browses pre-selected
web sites on air, explaining and discussing thé
contents with a local expert in thé national
languages.
In less critical times, thé stations also use thé
suitcase unit to cover local sporting events such
as football matches and officiai célébrations. Thé
unit has even been much in demand to give a
spécial touch to Touareg weddings at nomadic
camps in thé désert surrounding Timbuktu.
But with thé locust crisis, it had become clear
that thé suitcase radio has a vital rôle ta play in
reaching thé people scattered across thé area.
UNESCO bas decided to provide thé radio stations
with a 100 watt suitcase, which increases thé
broadcast radius from thé 15 to 20 kilomètres
possible with thé 30 watt transmitter to upto
60 km, covering thé entire populated area of
Timbuktu and thé 40 villages situated in thé Niger
Delta.
Although thé radio stations of Timbuktu are
small and under-funded, they hâve successfully
managed to share thé cost of maintaining thé
unit and hâve carried out live outside broadcasts
weekly for three years.
Stella Hugues
