RUSSIAN FEDERATION:
A QUESTION OF ATTITUDE
According to the 2004 UNAIDS report, Russia 
is one of the countries where the epidemic 
is spreading the fastest. The number of new 
cases recorded in 2000 is almost twice the 
previous total since 1987. Yet the importance 
of the disease continues to be widely 
underestimated. His plight is repeated hundreds of times over in 
Russia, but people don’t really care. 
The recent World AIDS day “memorial March” 
in Moscow saw a small turnout and little media 
coverage. “We don’t have an AIDS problem” said 
Maria Zhakarova, an office worker and member 
of Russia’s burgeoning middle class. “Why would 
I go to a memorial day for AIDS victims when I 
know no one who has died of the disease? None 
of my friends are gay” she added.
Maria’s attitude is by no means unusual. 
When it first emerged in the former Soviet Union, 
AIDS was restricted largely to homosexuals, sex 
workers and prisoners. The picture, however, is 
changing, and faster than officials can cope with. 
The rate of infection from heterosexual sex has 
P
avel doesn’t really know how he 
contracted the HIV virus. It could have 
been when he was sharing needles in the 
metro underground with other addicts. Or during 
unprotected homosexual intercourse, the proceeds 
of which provided him with enough money to feed 
his addiction. Whichever it was, Pavel is a physical 
wreck. Unable to work, he lives on a meager 
government pension in a run-down apartment on 
the outskirts of Moscow and is struggling at age 22 
to see his way forward to any sort of future.
Few people in Russia 
rally to the AIDS 
cause

quadrupled from 5% in 2001 to 20% in 2003. The 
overcrowded conditions many city people live in, 
added to poverty and a prevailing sense of despair 
among the poorest, explain the progression to a 
certain degree. Fatal ignorance about the infection 
also contributes. According to certain studies, 
fewer than 60% of sexually active people think 
that condoms provide protection from the virus.
More women are becoming infected and as a 
result the number of mother-to-child infections 
has sharply escalated. And with a dire working 
class economic problem still predominant, 
prostitution is increasing almost as rapidly as the 
infection. Encouraging men to wear condoms 
doesn’t appear to be a major priority either in a 
nation where condom use has traditionally been 
low and sex education frowned upon by both the 
Orthodox Church and parents. 
HIGHEST RATE OF NEW INFECTIONS 
CURRENTLY IN RUSSIA
Still, it is infection rates amongst intravenous 
drug users which remains most worrisome: the 
annual growth rate of drug users is 5% and 
their number is currently estimated at between 
2 and 2 and a half million people. Meanwhile, 
substitute drugs such as Methadone are illegal in 
Russia, and doctors are often quoted saying that 
installing dispensers for sterile syringes would 
only encourage drug abuse.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that UNAIDS 
claims the former Soviet republics have the 
highest growth of HIV infections in any part of the 
world today. Indeed, the US National Intelligence 
Council, which advises the US President, believes 
that Russia could have 8 million new HIV 
infections in the next decade. That would equal 
10% of the Russian workforce.
Yet only 280,000 HIV and AIDS cases are 
registered officially in Russia, though the figure 
is probably much, much higher. According to 
Vadim Pokrovsky, Federal AIDS Centre official 
and a long-time AIDS activist, it is close to 1 
million. With negative population growth in 
Russia since the collapse of the Soviet state, the 
economic impact of the AIDS epidemic will be 
▲
acutely felt. Not only will the virus cause loss in 
human capital and productivity: the annual cost 
of retrovirals will impact heavily on the health 
budget. The World Bank estimates that treatment 
costs are unsustainable at current prices (World 
Bank, Russia Office, 2002).
The key to lowering infection rates is education. 
But as Pokrovsky notes: “We spend $1 million 
per year on awareness programs. We should be 
spending $70 million.”
A Russian doctor, trained in epidemiology, 
told me anonymously that there is virtually no 
information on the virus available to the medical 
profession. “People walk through the door every 
day with AIDS-like symptoms and a lot of the 
time doctors at my polyclinic don’t recognize that 
the person they are looking at is HIV positive. 
They just treat the symptoms. Anyway, even if 
they knew, what could they prescribe?” said this 
dispirited doctor.

Although pessimism is never in short supply in 
Russia, what is called for in the fight against AIDS 
in this country is hope that can turn into action. 
Few would disagree. Not even office worker 
Maria. But harnessing minds – and with them, 
hearts – is the challenge. 
Says Pavel: “I am not a leper. I am not a bad 
person. I have AIDS. I need drugs. That’s it! It’s 
simple. So why can’t people just understand and 
accept the situation?”
Monica Attard
in Moscow

The most rapid 
spread of the virus is 
among drug users 
The increase in 
prostitution is 
also a vector for 
transmitting AIDS
Photos © Dima Korotayev/Laski Diffusion/Gamma, Paris
