JUST A MOUSE CLICK AWAY:
SCHOOL FOR KAZAKH CHILDREN
Only 700 out of 
5400 educational 
institutions in 
Kazakhstan are 
linked to the 
Internet

Decades of Soviet 
nuclear testing have 
poisoned large areas 
of Kazakhstan. Result: 
Qualified teachers 
refuse to work there. 
To bridge the gap, 
UNESCO is launching 
an ICT distance learning 
programme.
contamination was carried by winds across the 
steppes far beyond the confines of the range. The 
contaminated area now covers some 550,000 km 
sq., about 1/5 of Kazakhstan, or an area “roughly 
the size of France, but without the Louvre or 
Montmartre,” wryly observes renowned Kazakh 
poet Olzhas Suleimenov, his country’s Permanent 
Delegate to UNESCO.
LETHAL
LONG-TERM EFFECTS
All information regarding the tests was cloaked 
in the deepest secrecy, including their impact on 
health. The only hospital in the region, military 
run, denied the existence of the numerous strange 
and disturbingly debilitating diseases appearing 
in the region, including leukaemia, other types 
of cancer and genetic mutations causing physical 
and mental defects. It’s impossible to know how 
many people have been affected since 1959 but 
Kazakh government estimates run as high as 1.7 
million with about 350,000 still afflicted today.
Semipalatinsk was renamed Semei after 
Kazakhstan became independent in 1991 and the 
Polygon was officially closed down. But the effects 
Massive
Soviet-era atomic testing has left the children of 
vast areas of Kazakhstan a lethal legacy, which 
extends beyond the obvious health issues posed 
by exposure to radioactivity. Coupled with 
economic hardship, contamination renders these 
zones unattractive to qualified teachers, who 
refuse to be posted there, thereby dampening 
hopes for the future entertained by the area’s 
children.
A recent UNESCO-sponsored study shows that 
the schools that do exist are inadequate. One 
teacher often teaches all subjects to all grades 
from 1 to 11 in a decrepit building and higher 
education is unavailable. UNESCO is launching 
a pilot project aimed at using Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) to develop 
distance learning software that will fill the void 
left by the shortage of teachers and ensure that 
the children in the contaminated areas are not 
denied their educational rights.
The most devastated zone is around 
Semipalatinsk, in eastern Kazakhstan, which 
was a huge nuclear testing range. From 1959 
until 1989, the Soviet military nearly succeeded 
in blasting the region off the map, conducting 
456 nuclear tests on the 18,000 km sq. site, 
called the Polygon. For 50 years, the radioactive 
Schools without boundaries
UNESCO is launching 
pilot comprehensive
distance education projects 
at secondary level in both 
Kazakhstan and Namibia. 
The Kazakh project will be 
extended to other countries 
in Central Asia, while the 
Namibia scheme will serve 
isolated regions in Africa. 
In the Kazakh project, the 
University of Erlangen 
Psychology Department in 
Germany will develop 
teaching software for student 
classes and teacher training. 
A kick-off meeting of all private 
and public partners, including 
the Ministry of Education 
and Katelco, a satellite 
television channel, was to be 
held in late summer in Almaty. 
The Namibia project is still 
being defined but will focus 
on math and science. While 
the country has a relatively 
well-developed primary 
school system, it has few 
secondary schools. Start-up 
dates for the projects are set 
for the 2004-05 school year. 

of radiation last thousands of years, sometimes 
with dramatic consequences. Even now, children 
are born without arms, hands growing directly 
from their shoulders, a result of radiation-caused 
genetic mutations. Parts of the area are 1,000 
times more polluted than Chernobyl. Some 
ground water is radioactive and, because so vast 
an area cannot be closed off, livestock are free to 
graze on contaminated grasslands.
Cleaning up has begun and serious efforts 
are being made to address the health needs of 
populations in these areas. But this is only one 
of many problems the country faces. There are 
a dozen other former nuclear sites to deal with 
along with the disaster of the drying up of the 
Aral Sea, causing desertification of arable land. 
With so many pressing needs, Kazakhstan is 
hard put to find funds for education.
FUNDS SCARCE FOR
EDUCATION
The schools that do exist in the area are 
isolated and remote. The shortage of teachers 
for the country is estimated at 3,700, but since 
independence, priorities have shifted along 
with the demands of the burgeoning market 
economy leading to a fall in public spending, 
including in education. Public sector teachers 
earn less than those in the highly popular private 
schools and are often forced to take a second job 
making them less available for their students. 
Teaching materials in Kazakhstan are generally 
outdated and of poor quality, 
and supplies are insufficient 
to meet the demands of 
the country’s 3,004,900 
schoolchildren.
Programmes in Asia, Africa 
and Brazil show that ICT can 
provide innovative solutions 
to a dearth of teachers. 
UNESCO is developing an ICT 
education programme that will 
draw on previous UNESCO 
experiences in other regions 
to produce a comprehensive 
system, says Team Leader Dana 
Ziyasheva. The project will 
adapt free software available 
in Europe aimed at education 
management and course 
production. It will also provide teacher training 
on how to use the software and strengthen 
infrastructure in selected pilot sites. “Relying on 
the educational expertise of Kazakh specialists 
and the transfer of know-how are the key to a 
sustainable project,” says Ziyasheva. A first step 
is training teachers to use both ICT and traditional 
methods efficiently to reach students. The steppes 
lack computers and remain mostly internet-
free. At present only 700 of Kazakhstan’s 5,400 
secondary schools are linked to the internet, but 
the government aims to have them all connected 
by the end of 2007.
Decontamination is the best way to solve 
the health problems and entice teachers back, 
but this is a long-term and costly undertaking. 
So far only $15 million of $43 million pledged by 
international donors in 1999 has trickled to the 
region. “We are not holding out a begging bowl,” 
Suleimenov says, but adds that the magnitude of 
the task is too daunting for any single country.
Pat Brett
UNESCO in action communication
Schools in the Semei 
region are isolated 
and remote
▼
© Bolatbek Amanbekov/UNESCO Almaty
