^
Thé slave was treated like a beast
of burden, a tool, an abject that
belonged to his master. He was
reputed ta be lazy, thieving, lacking
moral judgment and constantly
jeopardizing his owner's property.
Today, however, in thé islands
of thé Indian Océan, slaves are
increasingly recognized as thé
architects of a new culture and
society.
s %&-
Msea^em^^
Orill'ABlatlon
.BKnwcs" lêCc
KOÎCHIRO MAT^ÎURA :
It -.
Steven Obeegadoo compte présenter un dBeument de politique générale
sur l'utiilsaUon du kreQidans ies aatilteaaents prbnatet.

ecked by captivity and thé long
voyage, slaves deported to thé
islands in thé Indian Océan between
thé 171h and 19"' centuries were victims of racism,
de-socialized, de-cultured, almost dehumanized.
They were a sprinkling of individuals in exile,
torn from their familles and peer groups, eut off
from their myths, symbols and everything else
that anchored their reason for being. No lineage,
no name, no genealogy. Slaves were barred from
forming groups, and often could not understand
each other: Makuas, Yaos, "Inhambanes," Makondé,
Betsimisaraka, Sakalava, Merina, Betsileo and
other ethnie groups from Africa and Madagascar,
Indians, Malaysians and Indonesians, spoke différent
languages and belonged to différent traditions.
Hunters, stock breeders, farmers, from matrilineal,
patrilineal, polygamous, monogamous, gérontocratie
or monocratic societies, they had little in common.
Nonetheless, for thé saké of survival, they managed
to adapt to inhuman living conditions in a hostile
universe and to leave traces of their existence for
postenty.
Out of 63,447 slaves counted in 1826 on Bourbon
Island (now Réunion Island], 79.2% were farmers
(between 1680 and 1810, agriculture in thé islands
of thé Indian Océan was 90% dépendent on slave
labour); 16% servants; 2. 9 manual workers, 0.9%
sailors, 0. 6% day labourers and 0.4% fishermen.
In thé French colony, as in thé British colony of
Mauritius, thé slave "s thé équivalent of a tool,
"portage".
Nothing permitted thé immense majority of
thèse oppressed peuple to develop creativity or
spécifie professional skills. Yet "slaves with talent"
- what they called carpenters, cabinetmakers,
and stone masons at thé time - produced genuine
masterpieces, including roads, sugar factories,
churches, and East India Company buildings. Gol
Castle in Saint-Louis and thé Desbassays house
[Réunion), what is now thé history muséum in
Mahébourg and thé port of Saint-Louis (Mauritius)
are only a few examples of héritage they left
behind. And they made discoveries, such as thé
one by Edmond Albius (see box p. 21), which
revolutionized agriculture and inade thé island thé
top producer of vaailla in thé worid.
It has often been said that slaves did nothiiig
more than obey thé orders of thé boss or overseer.
Is that any reason to deny their contribution to thé
development of thé colonies and thé construction
of thé island societies in thé Indian Océan? Their
traces can be seen in areas as diverse as territorial
planning, social stnictures, economy and culture.
In a life story collected by Eve Prosper, historian
from Réunion, an elder more than 70 years old says:

"Thé most wonder&il tesson oiir slave ancestors
left us is thé knowledge of how to work with
persévérance, even m a hostile climate, and to get
good results. " Research donc on thé héritage left by
former slaves, notably oral tradition, show that thèse
men's share was crucial to thé évolution of Indian
Océan societies. It must be pointed out that they
numbered 140,000 in 1830, which amounted to 70%
of thé total population of Mauritius, Bourbon Island
and thé Seychelles.
While it is true that slaves were more likely to
carry out than to conceive thé création of material
héritage, it is just as true that they left us an
authentic intangible héritage. They succeeded in
something that no one, neither masters nor colonial
authorities, had foreseen. In laying thé foundation
of a new society which today bas its own cultural
specificities, ils language, spirituality and esthetics,
they accomplished a true miracle: thé "Créole
miracle".
Thé miracle is visible everywhere and primarily
in thé Créole laaguage. It was made up by slaves
and masters spoke it too. Today it is part of thé
cultural héritage of ail Indian Océan islands. Despite
attempts in thé 1960s to eradicate it from Réunion, it
resisted and finally was given thé status of régional
language, which thé political authorities long denied
it. In Mauritius, Créole is spoken by everyone, and
is currently being introduced experimentally as thé
language for primary éducation. In thé Seychelles,
Créole became thé officiai language after thé
country's independeno.
^Amoi/[À Atbia<s.
^t <sku^ c\\:\^ ^À ̂ t
UÂKttk pOÂ
For a long t'me, botanist
Ferreoi Beaumont Bellier
had been searnhing "n vsin
for e way to polii.iaté vaiiilla
artificiaity. Fhen a 12-ysar-
ùld kirt showed hirr, what
he had d;scoverâd !;owto
do: t<j;'r a var. Nla flcwg" ir. to
a pac.
Thé Kid wps his sleve. Mis
name was Edmond. Mis
niother h(«d riied when he
was born. »fe had grcwn up
h lis master's fruit gar'-fen
and lea'-ned from him to
lovri plants.
'îhiswas in 184'!, on
Bourbon Isla.ic! ;4euR;on
:sl?ir:d). BefurR thé botaniits
iii thû nuseuni 01' na'ïurat
histury ;n Paris and thé !ocal
sci6nt:sîs, t'-~f child p'odigy
;~.3j 'dentit'ec; thé mâle
a. iû femaie oigens 'n i'hs
sai r, a flowe', snd dev:ssd
a method of artificial
pol;instion thst sosn made
thé island thé leadi. 'j
prodiije.- o'Fva"[f;& i-: thé
t^cept in iViexico, where it
. s fsrt":;izeG bv a local bfc&
Slhe rne!;pc"iuL '/anr!a ha3
tj oe ool'i'-iated h,/ humsn
:iand.
Albius: lithograph
partrait, 1863.
cd'non'J's method snosc
quicki y throughout thé
color.y. Thé ianacwner from
thé sma:l town of Sainte'
Suzanne was happy to lend
his you"g sl&>'e te. ûther
Dlaniers .r' ;he colûny so he
could teach them hov" te
cultiv&te var. illa.
r)6spi te his ingenuity,
i-~d nond, w",o wa? g;ven tt;e
name /i;bius in 1848 when
sî3»'er" was abciished,
received nu seward ftom
his maswi or tl)p coionv'F
adtl'-orit;»s. !Js û'ir.d in
po"cr;y G. : August 9, ": 380,
at thé Sainle-Suzanne
ccinmun't',' iiospiîa'..
S. F.
^Mori^
Créole/ CApodrA
Fort Saint-Louis in
Part-louts
l
3
'3
l
8
Morir.s, a martial art
st:li practiced today in
Madagascar (Moraingy),
thé Comores (Mrengué),
Mayotte, Réunion island
and Afrsca, was brought
to thé islands by slaves
or recrurts from Africa
and Madgascar. Ciose
to Brazilian Capoeira
(see p. 4), Morini :)
helped slaves redefine
their lives and resist
thé cuttural oppression
of cotonization. Thé
surviving forms ofthis
ancestral rite rem'nd us of
thé extraordinary calturai
resources developed
by siaves in thé Créole
jslands of thé indian
Océan,
S. F.
^

^
Food, handicrafts, medicine, taies and legends
are ail components of thé rich legacy of thé slaves,
and ail part of thé Créole miracle. Particularly
music: sega and maloya, very popular with young
people, typical of thé islands in thé Indian Océan,
perpetuate thé memory of thé ancestors on public
and private radio (see box p. 7)
Of course, not ail Indian Océan island inhabitants
lay daim to thé history of slavery as their own.
As a conséquence of racism, undoubtedly, certain
descendants of slaves from Africa or Madagascar
do not recognize themselves as such, or try to
conceal thé fact, forgetting that "A people that
bas no memory has no future, " in thé words of
Aimé Césaire, poet from Martinique. Yet in récent
décades, a genuine cultural révolution is taking
place in thé région, and more and more thé
people are embracing their history. February 2 and
December 20 are holidays in Mauritius and Réunion,
commemoratiag their abolition of slavery in 1835
and 1848 respectively.
Finally, let us say that thé miracle has taken place
mainly at thé level of Créole identity, making thé
concept of "residential identity" thé keystone of
Créole societies in thé Indian Océan. While Africa
and Madagascar remain thé cultural références for
much of thé population, thé country we live in is
our real homeland.
Sudel Fuma,
University of Réunion
l. Thé différent ethnie groups from
thé Inhambanne (Mozambique) région were
ail given that géographie label on Bourbon
Island [Réunion).
