ICTP’s sister organization in Trieste, 
the Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) 
is 20 years old, and celebrated last October 
in Beijing (China). 
With a $750,000 grant from the Global 
Environment Facility, a new project is concentrating 
on 20 least developed countries, via the Third World 
Network of Science Organizations (TWNSO), an 
NGO set up by TWAS to unite research councils, 
science ministries and heads of science academies 
in developing countries around the theme of 
sustainable economic development. Under the 
rubric “sharing innovative experiences”, TWNSO 
commissions case studies on practical development 
themes, like managing water resources, conservation 
and use of indigenous and medicinal plants, and 
the biodiversity of dry lands.  “We challenged the 
scientific community in the South,” explains Hassan. 
“We drew up a list of areas in which we were 
looking for excellence and picked a few. It’s one of 
our major tasks and it will continue.”
TWAS also hosts the Third World Organization 
for Women in Science, that provides some 60 
women Ph.D. students from developing countries 
with grants to complete their studies. “They can 
go anywhere in the South,” explains Hassan. “Half 
are in South Africa, but others are in India, Brazil, 
Malaysia and China, usually through a ‘sandwich’ 
system, whereby they register at a university in 
their home country, go away for six months at a 
time, then return home. The number of applicants 
is huge. Many are excellent. It’s one of our most 
rewarding programmes.”
Peter Coles



“Twas a sweet marriage, and 
we prosper well…”
(Shakespeare, The Tempest)
For Executive Director Mohammed H.A.
Hassan, the objectives of TWAS 
haven’t changed since a group of eminent 
scientists from developing countries, under the 
leadership of Abdus Salam, set it up in 1983: to 
encourage excellence in science, support young 
scientists, promote South/South and North/
South cooperation in science, and to use science 
and technology to solve practical problems in 
developing countries.
But if the objectives haven’t changed, the means 
have evolved. “Now we’re concentrating on the 
least developed countries,” explains Hassan. “We 
were finding that we were giving little support 
to the very poor. So we’ve turned it round. 
We’re using the strength of the more successful 
(developing) countries to open up their labs. 
We’ve created a list of 600 centres of excellence in 
over 100 countries. We sign agreements with them 
so that they receive scientists from the very poor 
countries and pay for them. It’s a joint UNESCO/
TWAS project, with UNESCO paying for travel 
and subsistence. It’s just like the ICTP associate 
programme but it all takes place in developing 
countries.”
ICTP’s Alexei Smirnov is a 
happy man. Last year, after some 
20 years of efforts, independent 
experiments proved that his 
contribution to the theory of 
neutrinos was right, earning 
Raymond Davis and Masatoshi 
Koshiba the Nobel Prize for 
physics. 
Neutrinos are sub-atomic 
particles with almost no mass. 
The Sun’s core produces countless 
billions of them, all the time, 
through nuclear fusion. It takes 
about eight minutes for one to fly 
the 150 million kilometres from 
the Sun’s core to earth, where 
some 60 billion neutrinos hit every 
square centimetre every second. 
But when they get here, they 
just pass right through, which 
makes them exceptionally hard 
to detect. In the 1960’s Davis built 
a massive pool containing 615 
tons of dry-cleaning fluid, 1.5 km 
underground in a disused gold 
mine, to spot their passage. And 
over a 30-year period, he found 
evidence of just six or so a month. 
A triumph, given how elusive 
these little particles are – except 
that this was about a third the 
number that theory predicted. 
Which is where Smirnov and his 
colleagues stepped in.
In 1985, Stanislav Mikheyev 
and Alexei Smirnov added to 
an existing theory developed by 
Lincoln Wolfenstein that there are 
three different kinds (“flavours”) 
of neutrino, corresponding to the 
three kinds of charged “lepton” 
particles (electrons, muons and 
tau) that were already known to 
exist. The researchers suggested 
that, in their passage from the sun, 
the neutrinos were converting 
(oscillating) from one “flavour” 
to another.  This, they said, would 
explain the “deficit” between 
observation and theory, because 
the detectors were set up mainly 
to detect electron neutrinos.
