Thé World Commission on thé Ethics
ofScientific Knowledge and Technology''
(COMEST) brought scientists, légal
experts and space programme directors
together for a symposium on "thé légal
and ethical framework for astronauts"
at UNESCO's Paris headquarters on
October 29
To whom do l complain to if thé sky falls on
my head? What law applies and which court
is compétent?» Those are thé questions
Gabriel Lafferranderie** half-seriously asked
himself in 1997. Since then, thé development of
thé 16-nation International Space Station (ISS)
has not made matters any clearer. Let's say débris
does drop out of thé sky. Will it be necessary
to ask which part of thé station it cornes from?
Which of thé 16 countries built that section of thé
«erector set» spacecraft?
Like space itself, space law might seem quite
murky to mère Earthlings like us. There are texts,
such as thé 1967 Space Treaty, thé Agreement
on thé Rescue of Astronauts, thé Return of
Astronauts and thé Return of Objects Launched
into Outer Space and even thé 1998 Agreement on
thé International Space Station, which attempts
to untangle in advance thé légal intricacies that

might anse if a crime took place aboard thé
ISS. Ail thèse texts might seem largely sufficient
because they pertain to situations that, for thé
most part, hâve not occurred yet. What's more,
thé burden of determining what constitutes a
crime will fall primarily on a small group of
individuals living and working in close proximity
to each other, and will probably require ethical
judgement before légal judgement.
But chances are that thèse texts and thé
ethical reflection swirling around them will fall
short in thé near future. New directions in space
exploration are opening up horizons very différent
from those of thé period of thé moon launches
and thé Cold War. Commercial and national
interests are increasingly looming up behind



astronauts, described as "envoys of mankind" by
thé Outer Space Treaty. Thé two flights thé private
rocket-powered plane SpaceShipOne made in
September and October 2004 show that thé âge
of space tourism opened up by billionaire Dennis
Tito's May 2001 trip is hère to stay. Thé ticket
is still quite pricey - 160,000 euros - but Virgin
Galactic says aver 7,000 potential passengers
are already queuing up for its flights, which are
scheduled to begin in 2007 or 2008, and other
'carriers" will probably follow suit. That means
there will be many more astronauts in a few years
than during thé entire first half-century of space
exploration.
MORAL RESPONSIBILITY AND
FINANCIALUABILITY
But it also means new problems, from something
as banal as lost luggage to determining what
constitutes an acceptable risk to space tourists.
(Astronaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré says that in 1969
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin had just one
chance in two of coming back from thé moon safe
and sound, and today thé risk is 3 %, which is
quite high for mère tourists!) Thé growth of space
tourism will also raise thé likelihood of seeing
crimes and misdemeanours committed in space,
but thé existing text applies only to thé ISS. "Thé
fîrst recognized space criminal, " North Carolina
University anthropologist Péter Redfield said at
thé October meeting, "could in fact prove to be
an unethical corporation that violâtes commercial
law in search of greater profit, or a particularly
rude and belligerent space tourist who goes one
step too far. "
A single example is enough to show thé limits
of présent law in dealing with today's situation.
Dennis Tito and his fellow trailblazers were
still "envoys of mankind" and they incurred thé
moral responsibility and fiaancial liability of thé
State responsible for launching thé vessel aboard
which they travelled. Imagine a passenger on thé
Virgin Galactic or another future carrier causing a
disaster during a space flight. Neither thé party at
fault nor thé company that sent thé craft into orbit
could afford to cope with such a possibility.
Tourist-astronauts will be joined by future
astronaut-colonists. At thé October 29 meeting,
Jacques Arnould, of thé CNES (Centre National
d'Etudes Spatiales, thé French space agency),
pointed out that for thé moment astronauts are
still campers "working and living in space", but
thé day is coming when they will be "settled
in space". Longer and longer space sojourns,
increasingly far from Earth, will raise new
technical problems as well as ethical and légal Sillionaire Dennis
Tito launched thé
era of space tourism
(left).
Virgin Galactic
hopes to develop
space flighîs by 2007.

Earth viewsd îrom a
space sîation
issues. How will existing principles be applied to
thé situation? Should new régulations or ethical
considérations govern astronauts' activities? In
thé long run, one may wonder whether a spécial
status will hâve to be created for space settlers'
descendants whose ties with Earth are so loose
that they could only be described as a différent
species.
PONDERING ASTRONAUTS'
STATUSANDOTHERETHICAL
QUESTIONS
Without peering quite so far ahead into thé
future, it might be worth pondering whether thé
foundations of thé astronaut's status should be
revised. Until now, astronauts hâve been considered
pioneers pushing back new frontiers, focusing
mainly on scientific research and geostrategic
compétition. Is thé driving force behind space
exploration shifting, with économie motives
taking precedence aver research? It might also
be worth asking other kinds of ethical questions
involving space exploration: wouldn't thé resources
swallowed up by flights to Mars be put to better
use on Earth, to combat illiteracy for example?
Thé October 29, 2004 meeting, organised
by UNESCO, thé European Centre for Space
Law (ECSL), thé European Space Agency
and thé Institut du droit de l'espace et des
télécommunications at Université Paris XI-Sceaux,
tried to map out thèse uncharted territories.
"We're hère to move thé debate forward, or rather
to get it started, " says Julien Tort of UNESCO's
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology,



adding that to his knowledge, UNESCO is thé
only international organisation which "provides a
framework for thinking about space ethics issues.'
Adigun Ade Abiodun, chairman of thé Committee
on thé Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS)
and thé meeting's rapporteur, concluded by calling
on States to develop space policies and laws.
Pierre Gaillard
* UNESCO has been exploring thé ethics
of outer space for five years.
**Today président of thé ECSL
