Tea in the Sahara
Suspended for 23 years, the Tan-Tan Moussem reincarnates 
as a showcase for Moroccan intangible heritage

“Do you know how we treat a broken 
bone? Bury the person in sand. The bone 
sets itself,” the Saharawi herbalist in 
charge of the traditional medicine tent cheerfully 
informs a visitor from France. Then he explains 
various remedies on display, effective for common 
ailments from indigestion to bronchitis. The scene 
was this year’s Tan-Tan Moussem, or traditional 
festival, held in the southern Morocco town from 
September 13 to 19, which brought together several 
thousand Sahara nomads from more than 30 tribes 
to show off their unique customs and folklore. Other 
Moussem attractions included fantasias - galloping 
horsemen firing rifles in perfect synchronicity – as 
well as sleek racing camels, story telling and poetry 
reading in dialect, ululating young women in bridal 
finery and antique silver jewelry, and musicians and 
dancers from as far away as Mali and Mauritania. 
The Tan-Tan Moussem used to be a major social, 
commercial and cultural event for the desert tribes, 
held annually in honor of revered holy man Saint 
Sidi Mohamed Laghdef, but it died out in the 1970s. 
At the instigation of Spanish explorer and goodwill 
ambassador Kitin Munoz, UNESCO sponsored 
its revival in the context of the organization’s 
promotion of oral and intangible cultural heritage, 
Photo exclusive by Michel Ravassard

zoom

particularly of endangered ethnic groups. This year’s 
version reestablished the Tan-Tan Moussem as tribal get-
together, cultural crossroads, tourist attraction and tribute 
to the nomad’s ancient, ephemeral way of life.
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR EXCHANGE
More than just a colourful celebration, it was a rare 
opportunity for exchange between desert people and a 
variety of distinguished visitors. At the closing festivities 
on September 18, presided by Morocco’s Prince Moulay 
Rachid and UNESCO Director-General Koïchiro Matsuura, 
actresses Claudia Cardinale, Marisa Berenson (both UNESCO 
goodwill ambassadors) and Isabelle Adjani were among 
the VIPs mingling with nomads, ministers, diplomats and 
local dignitaries. The guests from Europe, some donning 
Saharawi dress for the day, toured exhibition tents depicting 
tribal life. Food preparation, weaving, saddle-making 
and other crafts, popular games, tribal arbitration and 
Koranic education were illustrated as well as medicine.
“The living testimony of the Saharawi oral and artistic 
cultures that we are able to discover at the Tan-Tan Moussem 
is a lesson of knowledge and creativity from which we 
have much to learn,” said Mr Matsuura in his speech. He 
congratulated Morocco on its efforts, and expressed the hope 
that Morocco would be among the first countries – there 
are already five - to ratify UNESCO’s 2003 Convention for 
the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage.
Cathy Nolan
