U
nshaven, scowling, his face drawn with 
fatigue, Rashid Ahmed shakes his head 
disapprovingly. Leaning on his truck, a 
tired and dented old Iveco, the long-distance driver 
recites the list of his colleagues who have died 
because of what he calls their “lack of discipline on 
the road”. The man with the greying hair, who has 
spent more than 20 years driving back and forth on 
the roads of East and Central Africa, isn’t referring 
to traffic accidents. He’s talking about AIDS.
“Places like this,” he grumbles, as he loads 
sacks of cement into his truck, “You find all 
along the road. Guys stop here to fill up on gas 
and alcohol and buy themselves girls. And you 
know the rest.” The place is Naivasha, a truck-
stop town on the edge of the Rift Valley, some 
80 kilometres from Nairobi. Every day dozens 
of trucks pull up for the night. In the streets, 



A truck driver’s life doesn’t 
stop being dangerous at 
sunset. Nights are risky too, 
in the stopover towns along 
Kenya’s major highways.
KENYAN TRUCK DRIVERS 
TAKE A GAMBLE
In Kenya, an 
estimated 40% of 
truck drivers are HIV 
positive.

close to the shops and the bars with the garish 
signs, women aged 16 to 35 hang around, on the 
lookout for a potential client.
In Kenya, on the only road that links Mombasa 
to Busia, there are no less than a dozen towns 
like Naivasha. For the drivers, far from home 
for weeks on end, the street women are a great 
temptation. With dire epidemiological results. 
UNAIDS considers truck drivers a high-risk 
population and a significant vector for the spread 
of the virus. Kenya fits the pattern. The rate of 
infection is estimated at 40% among the drivers, 
compared to 12% in the general population. 
PREVENTION ON THE ROAD
In Naivasha, nearly everyone is aware of the 
reality of AIDS. But they place the responsibility 
elsewhere. Drivers tend to blame the promiscuity 
of the prostitutes. “For three beers, you can buy 
a girl for half an hour. In one night, she might 
go with five drivers, so if she’s infected, it’s a 
disaster,” Joseph Marenya, a seasonal driver, calls 
out from the cab of his truck.
As for the women, they talk about the drivers’ 
reluctance to use condoms. “After all those hours 
taking risks on the road, it’s another gamble for 
the Mambuyus (drivers). They don’t want to 
put on condoms. Some of them flatly refuse,” 
says Joyce Njambi, an adolescent who works in 
a beauty salon during the day and at night as a 
prostitute. “We know about prostitution and AIDS 
being dangerous,” adds another young girl, barely 
20, who calls herself Lucy. “But what does that 
mean compared to an empty stomach?”
Initiatives have been launched to combat 
the problem. All along the truck routes, large 
billboards warn against the risk of AIDS and 
recall the means of protection. The government’s 
programme to fight against AIDS and control 
sexually transmissible diseases, NASCOP, has 
conducted several information campaigns aimed 
at truckers. The Kenya Long Distance Truck 
Drivers’ Union has also tried to draw its members’ 
attention to the risks of unprotected sex with 
prostitutes. It cooperates with an American NGO, 
Africans United Against Aids Globally (AUAAG), 
to set up prevention centres all along Kenya’s key 
highways. Four reception centres have already 
opened on the Nairobi-Mombasa route. Drivers 
can pick up information brochures, advice and 
free condoms.
The campaigns, however, are slow in achieving 
results. Though drivers are generally informed 
about the disease, a number of them continue to 
ignore it. Besides, the miserable pay and dreadful 
working conditions inflicted by the trucking 
companies keep drivers in a precarious state 
that also nurtures the epidemic. “It’s a long-
term campaign,” admits the head of NASCOP, 
Dr Kenneth Chebet, “but it will pay off in the 
long run.”
Hands covered in cement dust, Rashid Ahmed 
is ready to take to the road again with his load. 
“You can’t prevent men in their prime from 
having sex on the road,” he says. “You have to 
give them condoms, force information on them, 
make them realize the part they play in spreading 
AIDS. It’s the only way.” 
Bogonko Bosire
in Nairobi
Prostitutes and 
their clients
