Caribbean (population 38.7 million), which 
has the second highest prevalence rate after 
sub-Saharan Africa. And, even though rates 
of awareness of HIV/AIDS and other sexually 
transmitted illnesses are over 70 percent in some 
islands, discrimination and intolerance are still 
major obstacles to prevention.
In the last two decades, HIV/AIDS has been 
moving steadily throughout the Caribbean. 
In 2003, the Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) estimated that up to 
80,000 persons were newly infected. As many 
as 50,000 are estimated to have died from
AIDS-related illnesses. 
UNSAFE SEX
Data show that Caribbean children begin to 
have sex as early as 8, 9 and 10 years old, but 
adults are still afraid to talk to them about safer 
sex, feeling it will make them promiscuous. 
Meanwhile, girls are at greater risk of HIV 
infection than boys. Meanwhile, more than 
50 percent of persons infected in the region are 
aged 20 - 39 years old, which means that many 
were infected between the ages of 14 and 19. And, 
for 32 percent of boys and 48 percent of girls, 
sexual initiation was forced. 



White sand beaches, luxurious flora and 
fauna, picturesque volcanic landscapes, 
warm, laid-back, fun-loving people. This is 
the Caribbean – the epitome of Paradise. But 
all is not well in Paradise. 
Today, it is raining in Portland (Jamaica). Inside 
a dilapidated two-room house in Hope Bay, 
Elizabeth is cringing in a corner trying to avoid 
the water falling through the roof. No one will 
be able to sleep tonight in the cramped bedroom. 
Diagnosed with HIV in 2001, Elizabeth has been 
having a hard time coping with the disease. 
Shortly after diagnosis, one of her family told the 
neighbours. Before long, everybody knew.
“Since then I have been subjected to rejection, 
discrimination and lack of respect from the 
community. I became a burden to my children, as 
they were teased at school,” sobs Elizabeth. “My 
sole income was based on sewing. But since my 
illness, my customers gradually left. My landlord 
gave me notice. He disconnected my water in 
June 2003 and my electricity in July. I was given 
some land to live on, but because I have AIDS, 
some of the neighbours don’t want me there.”
Elizabeth is one of the estimated 22,000 persons 
living with HIV in Jamaica with a population 
of 2.6 million, and an estimated 590,000 in the 
Social pressures on men put women and girls at risk
In Trinidad and Tobago, a 
1999 Ministry of Health report 
showed a female-to-male ratio 
in HIV cases among the 10 to 
19 age group of 7:1. The picture 
is similar in Jamaica, where 
girls in the same age group are 
two-and-a-half times more likely 
than boys to be HIV infected 
(Ministry of Health, Jamaica 
2003).
“Many young girls are 
caught in a trap of sexual 
vulnerability,” says Robert 
Carr, Executive Director of the 
non-governmental organization, 
Jamaica AIDS Support. “They 
live in a culture that celebrates 
materialism but has high levels 
of poverty and unemployment. 
They live in a culture that says 
they must go to school. But they 
are not provided with the means 
to do so. They live in a culture 
that celebrates womanhood 
and motherhood, but does not 
always provide the information 
and the experience to do so 
safely.”
“Each of these paths leads 
young girls into early sexual 
initiation in a context in which 
they often do not have the tools 
they need to manage their 
sexual and reproductive health” 
he adds. 
And, “where women know 
their partners or husbands are 
unfaithful,” says Carr, “they do 
not feel empowered to change 
how, where and when they 
and their partners have sex. 
To insist on condom use could 
bring violence, with death or 
homelessness as a real danger.”

The HIV epidemic is also driven by cultural 
practices, where both men and women can 
have multiple sexual relationships. In Jamaica, 
54 percent of men and 17 percent of women in 
the 15 – 49 year age group have had more than 
one sex partner in the past 14 years. Many of 
these are serial monogamous relationships, where 
a person has only one sexual partner at a time, 
even if the relationship may only last a week or 
so. Condoms are rarely used. 
Commercial sex work is also believed to play 
a large role in the epidemic, especially in the 
Dominican Republic and Guyana. But the root 
is still poverty, which forces men, women and 
children to leave home for urban centres to 
sell sexual favours. And poverty affects women 
disproportionately. They are often economically 
dependent on men and unable to negotiate 
safer sex.
WIDESPREAD
HOMOPHOBIA
Widespread and often violent homophobia in 
the region is also forcing male homosexuals to 
marry, or have relationships with women, to 
avoid aggression. And yet studies show that 
homosexuals who are emotionally involved 
with regular partners perceive unprotected 
penetrative sex as not risky, although most do 
not know the HIV status of their partner. Since 
both men and women in this case are considered 
regular partners, the risk of HIV infection is 
particularly high. 
Already, many Caribbean countries have AIDS 
prevention programmes. In some, laws make 
HIV/AIDS a notifiable disease (such as Jamaica, 
St. Lucia, Belize and Guyana). In the Dominican 
Republic, the law specifies the rights of people 
infected with HIV while, in the Bahamas, 
legislation obliges rapists and sex offenders to be 
tested for HIV. Meanwhile, in Jamaica, Bahamas, 
Bermuda and Barbados, programmes to prevent 
mother-to-child transmission are doing well. 
Condom distribution has increased from 2.5 
million in 1985 to 10.8 million in 1999, while 
condom use with non-regular partners has moved 
from 37 percent in 1992 to 67 percent in 2000 
among women.
For Robert Carr, Caribbeans still need to have a 
serious look at their behaviour. “Discrimination 
in its many forms is killing us. Many of our 
habits are self-defeating – for example, when 
we encourage young boys to be aggressively 
heterosexual, or our violent verbal and physical 
repression of men who have sex with men. We 
have to take responsibility for how our norms 
contribute to the harsh and violent society in 
which we live, and their role in contributing to 
the spread of the epidemic in the region.”
Patricia Watson
These teenagers 
might be 
embarrassed by 
HIV/AIDS education, 
but it could save 
their lives, as they 
are particularly 
vulnerable in the 
Caribbean



The UNESCO Office for 
the Caribbean is playing 
a leadership role in the 
region in response to the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic. It 
has focused on achieving 
consensus among 
Governments and other 
stakeholders, establishing 
partnerships for action, 
and building expertise in 
member states. 
www.unescocaribbean.
org/home.htm
© Ministry of Health Jamaica
