L^!'.
Laiiiichmgoffhe
Internadonal Year w
Cape Coast (Ghana)
I. Thé message of
UNESCO's Director-
Général is available
in its entirety at:
www.unesco.org/dg
roclaimed International Year for thé
Commémoration of thé Struggle against
SIavery and its Abolition by thé Général
Assembly of thé United Nations, 2004 marks thé
bicentenary of thé first independent black state,
Haïti, symbol of uprising and résistance by slaves..
"By institutionalizing memory,
resisting thé onset of oblivion,
recalling thé memory of a tragedy that for long
years remained hidden or unrecognized, and
by assigniag it its proper place in thé human
conscience, we respond to our duty to remember,"
said thé Director-General of UNESCO, Koïchiro
Matsuura, in his message for thé occasion.
Thé year, devoted to a tragedy recognized
as a "crime against humanity" in 2001 at thé
Durban Worid Conférence against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolérance,
has helped humanity accomplish its duty of
remembrance as well as promote thé fight against ail
forms of slavery and radsm in thé world today.
In thé framework of thé Year, UNESCO prcpared
a séries of activities m coopération with Member
States, National Commissions, govemmental and
non-governmental organizations, UNESCO Clubs,
thé international sdentific cofflmunity, Nobel Prize
winners, and UNESCO's Artists for Peace and
Goodwill Ambassadors.
Several events will mark thé closing of thé
International Year and thé célébration of
thé International Day for thé Abolition of
Slavery on December 2.
A traveling exhibition entitled "Lest
We Forget: thé Triumph over Slavery,"
created by thé Schomburg Center
in New York in collaboration with
UNESCO's project "Thé Slave Route,"
will be inaugurated at UNESCO. Thé
show, which bas already traveled to
several countries, traces thé économie impact of
thé slave trade and thé labour of African slaves
on American and European developmeat, and thé
trade's disastrous effects on économie, political and
social life in Africa. It highlights its contributions
to language, religion, music and institutions on ail
three continents.
> Thé présentation of thé Toussaint Louverture prize,
named after thé freed slave who fought for thé
independence of Haiti; it is awarded in récognition
of contributions ta thé struggle against domination,
racism and intolérance. Lauréates are thé well-
known poet from Martinique Aimé Césaire, bard of
"Négritude," and Abdias do Nascimento, founder of
thé Teatro Expérimental do Negro, thé fîrst Afro-
Brazilian association to combine thé fight against
discriinination with thé issue of réhabilitation of
African culture as a fundamental asset of Brazilian
society._
A spécial concert by Gilberto Gîl, UNESCO
Goodwill Ambassador and Brazilian Minister of
Culture.
. An international colloquium on "Issues of
Memory: Coming to Terms with thé Slave Trade
and Slavery" explores interactions between
différent approaches to memory, such as revisionist
historiography, thé ethics of responsibility, and
identity-based mobilisation for thé reconfiguration of
collective memory.
