ac scpe ce
Much of our carbon gas émission is absorbed by thé océans. This is a boon for thé
atmosphère, already saturated with gases contributing to thé greenhouse effect.
But it is a growing danger for marine ecosystems, in which acidity is increasing.
UNESCO and thé sdentific community are sounding thé alarm.
Austraiia. /-f l , , , now, we considered it a blessing
Underwater robot l/1 I^L'l/ 11 for thé environment. Thé océans
nearthe Gréât covering two-thirds of thé planet's surface absorb
Barrier Resf much of our carbon gas émissions, particularly
carbon dioxide, which would otherwise contribute
to thé greenhouse effect. Thé problem is that
océans are being harmed in thé process. Thé
océan environment has significantly increased
in acidity since thé start of thé industrial era. In
May 2004, UNESCO and thé scientific community
sounded thé alarm at a symposium organised by
thé Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission
(IOC) and thé Scientific Committee for Oceanic
Research (SCOR).
In récent years, heat waves, unusual droughts,
a succession of cyclones and storms hâve
focused attention on thé climate and supposed
signs of global warming. Up until now, interest
in what is happening in thé océans was limited
to discovering their influence on climate
models and their response to a warming of thé
planet's atmosphère (raised water levels and
températures). But thé absorption of around a
third of thé carbon gas output of human activity
aver two centuries - some 118 billion tonnes
between 1800 and 1994 - has threatened thé
chemical balance of thé sea's upper levels.
Concern over climate change has now been
overtaken by worries of a potentially disastrous
dégradation of marine ecosystems.
PLANKTON IN DANGER
In soluble form, carbon gas is acidic. Thé
increased acidity of seawater, that is to say its
lowered pH* level, translates to a deficiency in
carbonates (l). But carbonates are used by coral

e * se e ce
and some plankton species to form protective
outer shells made of calcium carbonate. "A
decreased availability of carbonates will lead ta
a lessened calcification of thé exoskeletons of
thèse species" of between 10 and 40 per cent, says
James Orr, a biogeochemist at France's Laboratory
for Climate and Environmental Science [LSCE)
and member of thé planning committee for thé
SCOR-IOC symposium. Based on measurements
taken at nearly 10, 000 sites between 1990 and
1998, Richard A. Feely, Christopher L. Sabine
and their colleagues hâve clearly highlighted thé
importance of thé level of carbonates in seawater
[l). Their research shows that, at thé current rate
of carbon gas émissions, thé décline in this level
is going to worsen.
Coral reefs are among thé first victims of this
change. They are no longer threatened only by
thé increase in thé ocean's température but also
by thé shift in its chemical balance. Various
uncontrollable chain réactions are being triggered.
One of thé most important is thé réduction in thé
size of some plankton species which serve as food
for fish and other marine organisms. Thé entire
food chain is being perturbed in unpredictable
ways that could imperil thé ocean's biodiversity
and production.
Proiiîeration of
phytopSanktonoffthe
iVorwegian coast
CARBON GAS IN THE OCEAN'S
DEPTHS?
Thé reasons to view thé océans as CO; "sinks"
hâve become well-established. Thé discovery was
ail thé more eye-opening because very few experts
had anticipated it. Thé océan in effect acts as an
enormous réservoir of carbon (holding around
37,000 gigatonnes, or 37,000 billion tonnes),
much more than in thé atmosphère (around
800 gigatonnes). Thé addition of human-produced
carbon gas (nearly two gigatonnes a year of
thé total six gigatonnes generated by industrial
activity(2)) would seem relatively harmless.
Some hâve even theorized, and still theorize,
that carbon gas could be captured at its source,
compressed into a liquid form, and injected into
thé ocean's depths. Based on oceanic circulation
models, carbon gas stored in this way would not
cycle to thé surface and into thé atmosphère for
several hundred years.
Cesare Marchetti was thé first to suggest this
solution in 1977, while he was working for thé
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IASA) in Austria. His idea for disposing of thé COz
produced in Europe was to send it to thé bottom
of thé Atlantic Océan, off thé Strait of Gibraltar.
Marchetti's proposai was picked up two years
later by American scientists, and in thé 1980s thé
US Department of Energy started researching thé
possibility. Thé underiying question was: Given
that thé carbon gas dissolved on thé surface is only
very slowly circulated into deep water, is there a
way to speed up thé process? Especially as deep
water, being colder, absorbs carbon gas at a much
faster rate than surface water.
CAUTION IS THE WATCHWORD
Thé European Commission currently faveurs
carbon gas storage underground or in saline land
aquifers and gives little support to researching
océan storage. This path is mostly being explored
by Norway, Japan and thé United States, though
as it stands US authorities seem unconvinced by
thé technique. Scientists in those three countries
are working together on thé Océan Abyssal
Carbon Experiment (OACE) project (2002-
2005). Ceertain results were presented at thé 7th
International Conférence on Greenhouse Cas
Control in Vancouver in September 2004(3). In thé
industrial sector, caution reigns, as expressed in
a report prepared by scientists from thé oil group
Total and thé Institut Français du Pétrole (IFP)
for thé 19th World Energy Congress in Sydney
* Thé pH of a
liquid or a solution
measures its acidity
or alkalinity. A level
of 7 is neutral, lower
numbers indicate
increasing acidity,
and higher numbers
indicate increasing
alkalinity. Thé pH
of seawater is on
average between 8
and 8. 3. This level
has dedined by
around 0. 1 since
thé beginning of thé
industrial era.

Les écoies de la
région de Semei sont
isolées et (Sifficiles
d'accès,
in September 2004, which read: "Even with a
certain scientific guarantee as to thé system's
equilibrium, it would not be easy for thé public to
allow our océans - part of our universal héritage
and a source of life - to be used as storage sites.
Thé océans hâve long been unwisely considered
bottomless trash cans [... ]" (4).
This sort of storage also has to be evaluated
in thé light of international measures protecting
thé océan environment, such as thé London
Convention on waste disposai at sea, even
though, strictly speaking, COi cannât be
considered waste. But whether we like it or not,
part of thé carbon gas output resulting from
human activity has already gone into thé océan.
Therefore, if we short-circuit C02's présent route
(through thé atmosphère and surface océan)
by putting it directly at thé bottom of thé sea,
thé question is whether this créâtes additional
risks to thé deep océan environment, as Takashi
Oshumi, Japanese scientist and member of thé
SCOR-10C planning committee, wrote in 2002. (5)
One achievement of thé conférence was bringing
together thé various points of view and scientific
knowledge from différent disciplines (chemistry,
physics, biology, ecology, paleoceanography... ),
as another member of thé committee, French
biogeochemist Liliane Merlivat, pointed out.
LOOKING BEFORE LEAPING
A multidisciplinary confrontation is crucial
for evaluating each alternative on scientific,
environmental and économie grounds, as thé
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) bas recommended. That also holds for
proposais to fertilize thé océan environment
with injections of iron, an élément essential for
activating photosynthesis. Thé idea now is to
encourage thé growth of océan végétation in order
to sequester some of thé carbon dioxide generated
by humans. Despite inconclusive results so far,
some companies hâve already started to develop
techniques implementing this process, notes
Patricia Bernai, thé lOC's Executive Secretary. For
symposium participants, thé scientific évaluation
has to continue before any décision is made on thé
method's large-scale application.
Given thé volume of émissions predicted
for thé décades ahead, nothing should be left
to chance. Scientists predict that by 2100 thé
décline in surface seawater pH will accelerate
further, multiplying by as much as a factor
of three compared to thé level recorded since
thé beginning of thé industrial era. This is a
phenomeaoa unprecedented in thé last 20 million
years, says Maria Hood, a specialist researcher for
thé IOC. UNESCO's initiative aims to address thé
situation. "Our main message, " Patricia Bernai
stresses, "is to leave no path unexplored, but to
evaluate each one according to strict scientific
principles. This is thé key to making fully
informed political décisions about a problem that
goes far beyond mère national interests."
Dominique Chouchan
[l) R. A. Feely et al.. Impact of anthropogenic 00; on
thé CaC03 System in thé océans. Science, vol. 305,
pp. 362-366, 2004
(2) IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Carbon
Dioxide Chemistry and Properties, March 2002 (http://
www.ieagreen.org.uk/index.htm)
(3) Péter M. Haugan et al., Océan abyssal carbon
experiments at 0, 7 and 4 km depth, in E.S.Rubin,
D. W. Keith and C. F Gilboy (Eds. ), Proceedings of 7th
International Conférence on Greenhouse Cas Control
Technologies (IEA Greenhouse Cas Programme), in press
(4) G. Plouchard (IFP), P. Le Thiez (IFP), L. de Marliave
(Total), S. Crépin (Total), Capture et stockage du CO;,
contraintes et progrès, World Energy Council, Sydney 2004.
(5) Takashi Oshumi, Océan storage, including costs and
risks, IPCC Workshop for Carbon Capture and Storage,
2002
