1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, the virus 
spread throughout the country at devastating 
speed, particularly in the northern region, which 
remains the most affected by the disease. In 1988, 
the percentage of drug addicts infected with the 
virus went from 0 to 30% in six months. Just in 
Chiang Mai, a 1989 study showed that 44% of 
the prostitutes were HIV-positive. In 1991, at the 
height of the epidemic, 143,000 new infections 
were counted in the country’s population of 
62 million.
TOUGH TACTICS TO HALT 
INFECTION
Starting in 1991, Thai authorities reacted 
vigorously to the crisis. Owners of brothels, 
nightclubs, hotels used by prostitutes and 
massage parlours were ordered to impose the use 
of condoms, or risk having their businesses closed 
down. At the same time, ads about the dangers of 
the virus and how to be protected against it were 
aired constantly on radio and TV. “If the strategy 
worked, it was because commitment at the 
highest level of government was behind it, relayed 
Using draconian methods, Thai 
authorities managed to reduce the 
epidemic in rather spectacular 
fashion. But warning signals seem 
to be flashing again. 
S
porting a perpetual grin, Khun likes to make 
conversation as he drives his songthaew, 
a collective taxi that cruises the streets of 
Chiang Mai, second largest city in the country 
about 800 kilometres from Bangkok. A cheerful 
man, unfazed by the suffocating heat that weighs 
on the city at the start of the rainy season or by the 
uninterrupted roar of traffic, Khun is telling the story 
of his life. His life before, when he was a dishwasher 
in a London hotel, or his life now, with his wife, two 
daughters…and his mistresses. Khun confides that 
sometimes he has adventures. What about AIDS? In 
response he opens the glove compartment and takes 
out a box of condoms, hidden behind a jumble of 
music tapes and old papers. “I never go out without 
them,” he says, holding up the box.
Khun, 43, is part of that generation of Thais 
hardest hit by the epidemic. Between the mid-

fighting AIDS. Many organizations had to close 
down for lack of funding. The distribution of free 
condoms in places of prostitution was suspended. 
And the effects of slackened effort in prevention 
are being keenly felt. The Ministry of Education, 
despite its crucial role in prevention, has limited 
involvement. “Teachers are expected to teach 
prevention in the classroom, but either because 
they are shy or they lack training, they often 
don’t,” explains Alice Schmidt, from the UNESCO 
office in Bangkok. “And if they’ve all heard of the 
virus, some very high-level education officials 
know very little about the disease.”
In Chiang Mai, the idea of Thailand as an 
in the community by numerous actors, from 
policemen to military to NGOs,” adds Sompong 
Charoensuk, country programme adviser of 
UNAIDS in Bangkok.
Consequently, the number of new infections 
was divided by six, reaching 23,673 in 2002. And 
people’s behavior evolved, in a country where 
men tend to have extramarital affairs. The use of 
condoms during paid sexual relations rose from 
14% in 1989 to more than 90% five years later. 
Another example, the percentage of enlisted men 
patronizing prostitutes dropped from 60% in 1991 
to 25% in 1995. For all these reasons, Thailand 
was held up as a model in the region, particularly 
in comparison with some of its neighbours, like 
India, where the virus is spreading at an explosive 
rate. UNAIDS considers Thailand as one of the 
few success stories in the fight against the disease.
BUDGET CUTS
Yet while the statistics are undeniable, the 
practical reality is more ambiguous. First because 
the economic crisis that struck Asia in 1997 
provoked serious cuts in the budget allocated to 
In ten years, the 
number of new 
infections has been 
divided by six.
Left: in the early 
1990s, owners 
of prostitution 
establishments were 
ordered to require 
the use of condoms
© Lalit Sakchai/AP/Sipa, Paris

exemplary case is being called into question by 
some. “The numbers concerning new infections 
are seriously underestimated,” according to 
the head of an NGO who prefers to remain 
anonymous. “And men around here continue to 
think that using a condom is an insult to their 
manhood.”
Now considered among the new high-risk 
categories are young people, homosexuals and 
drug addicts, as well as ethnic minorities and 
migrants. “In my country, Myanmar, many 
villagers go seek their fortune in the big cities of 
Thailand,” says Muang, a young Buddhist monk 
from the state of Shan. “When some of them 
return, they die of malaria or tuberculosis. They 
don’t know they are carrying the virus.”
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
AIDS PATIENTS
Muang is in Chang Mai to attend a three-day 
workshop on AIDS. In the old Wat Pa Pao temple, 
sheltered from the noise and incessant bustle of 
the city, some 30 monks and novices are silently 
taking notes. On the blackboard is a drawing of 
a ship. Aboard are pregnant women, workers, 
prostitutes, drug addicts, migrants and children. 
The question the monks are given to ponder: if 
there is a storm, who should be the first to be 
thrown overboard? The prevention work done by 
the Sangha Metta project, the NGO organizing 
these workshops, is based on Buddhist principles. 
The idea is that the monks will go back to their 
communities to participate in prevention efforts 
and contribute to reducing stigmatization.
In a country where nearly a million people 
are infected, rejection of those afflicted remains 
chronic. Cases of employees fired or students 
expelled because they are HIV-positive are not 
rare. “Stigmatization is less pronounced in rural 
areas that are heavily affected by the disease, 
simply because it’s become a daily reality,” 
explains Gareth Lavell, director of the Rejoice 
Urban Development Projects, an organization 
that distributes drugs to people who are ill. “But 
in cities, the number of schools that will take 
an HIV-positive child can be counted on one 
hand.” On the eve of the 15th International AIDS 
Conference in Bangkok last July, a 4-star hotel in 
the capital had no qualms about separating clients 
according to their HIV status: those who were 
positive were asked to take their meals separately.
Yet with the support of the statistics, Thai 
authorities continue to defend their country’s 
success. “Thailand is still today a very good 
example of what can be done to stop the 
epidemic,” insists Sompong Charoensuk. Only 
as long, however, as prevention efforts continue, 
particularly in regard to young people. Otherwise, 
Thailand may cease to be a good example.
Agnès Bardon 
in Chiang Mai
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
10
8
6
4
2
0
Number
of infected
people
(in millions)
Estimation of number of 
infections avoided due to 
prevention efforts in Thailand 
Source: WHO, World Health report, 2004
Years
Infections avoided
without prevention
with prevention
