UNESCO in action science
The merits of
‘useless’ science
Since 1964 the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics has been a hothouse 
for scientific talent from developing 
countries
The Abdus Salam International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, in Trieste 
(Italy) has a reputation for doing 
world-class science. And yet most of its research 
is, deliberately, ‘useless’. At least at first view.
As Erio Tosatti, former acting-director of ICTP 
and a professor at the nearby International 
School for Advanced Studies (SISSA) explains, 
“All of the non-trivial advances are made by 
very clever inputs that may have been borrowed 
from theoretical physics and mathematics.” A 
good example would be the search engines we 
use to surf the internet. “It’s not just an increase 
in computing power,” he explains, “there is 
some very clever maths involved.” And, after 
all, the World Wide Web itself originated within 
the physics community not so far away from 
Trieste, at the European Organization for Nuclear 
Research (CERN) near Geneva (Switzerland).
There was a logic, based on experience, that led 
Abdus Salam to choose theoretical physics and 
maths as the backbone for a high-level institute 
dedicated to scientists from developing countries. 
“Mathematics is the key instrument. It’s crucial,” 
says Tosatti, “yet it is the cheapest.  You can dive 
right in. In Africa, it’s the main thing we can do 
that makes a difference. The people who come 
here from developing countries are like heroes in 
their own country - though they may not look like 
heroes!”
“It’s the environment that is missing in 
developing countries, not just the equipment,” 
adds Tosatti. And ICTP has none of the glum, 
nerdy feel its name may conjure to non-scientists.  
Its modern, beautifully equipped buildings are 
nestled on a wooded hillside overlooking the 
Adriatic. It rubs shoulders with the resplendent 
Miramare Castle and gardens built by Archduke 
Ferdinand Maximilian, when Trieste was still part 
of the Austrian empire. “The atmosphere is very 
informal,” says Iranian-born Seifallah Randjbar-
Daemi, head of the ICTP high energy physics 
group. “We don’t wear ties, we’re all on first 
name terms, and our office doors are open. I’ve 
been to many universities and this is one of the 
unique places open to anyone regardless of race 
or religion. Yet it is 100 percent tension-free. There 
are so many people, from so many backgrounds, 
sitting together in the cafeteria. Everyone is 

talking about a clash of ci
vilizations. But they’re 
all eating together – Jews, Muslims, Christians.” 
And, after all, the food (and coffee) is Italian, 
which also helps.
“This indicates to me that education is 
important,” says Randjbar-Daemi. “The more 
tolerant people are, the less prejudices they have. 
They may have radically opposed opinions, but 
they talk in a civilized way. During the Cold 
War, this was one of the first places that Soviet 
scientists met colleagues from the West, especially 
the USA. They used to come with a group of 
‘watchers’. ICTP is a model of collaboration run 
with a very small budget, with amazing impact. 
The Italians have been very generous. Italy is 
known all over the world through Trieste and 
ICTP.  Ex-students become ministers of science. 
They think of themselves as part Italian.”
But this is no playground, either. ICTP regularly 
figures in the top 20 for the number of times its 
research papers are cited by other authors (the 
main barometer of significant science), which 
puts it alongside Harvard University.
Peter Coles
