THE PRICE 
OF SCHOOL FEES
Emotion surged across 
Kenya when 
President Mwai Kibaki kept his campaign promise 
to abolish school fees in 2003. Propelled by pent-
up hope, parents swarmed overnight to enrol 
their children in school. But as principals turned 
away pupils, the rosy picture was dimmed by the 
spectre of “the masses” swamping an already 
fragile education system.
Today, the good news is that more than a 
million new pupils are squeezing into classrooms. 
But unfortunately, the expected foreign assistance 
has not fully materialized. In short, “School fees 
were abolished with great euphoria but little 
planning,” according to Andiwo Obondoh of the 
Global Campaign for Education. 
THE AFRICAN MOVEMENT
The confusion is a rite of passage in the bold 
move towards free primary education made 
first by Malawi in 1994, followed by Uganda 
(1997), Cameroon (1999), the United Republic of 
Tanzania (2001) and Zambia (2002). Today any 
debate on free primary education must inevitably 
focus on these African countries, which offer 
valuable insight for Africa and for countries with 
high tuition fees such as Bhutan, Cambodia, 
India, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Nepal, 
Pakistan and Papua New Guinea.
Steve Packer of the EFA Global Monitoring 
Report was in Malawi when the government 
removed all school fees. “Enrolment surged from 
1.9 to 3.2 million in just three months. Some 
said it was crazy – the quality of the system 
was already appalling. But from a human rights 
perspective, can you deny millions of children 
ANY education, even if it is poor quality?” he 
says.
No is UNESCO’s resounding answer. 
“UNESCO believes that it is better to uphold 
the principle of free primary education and to 
address energetically the quality challenge 
posed by an enrolment surge than to ration 
In Sri Lanka, the 
law guarantees free 
primary school. But 
parents have to deal 
with indirect costs of 
schooling.
As countries abolish school fees, millions more 
children are entering primary school. But 
how much are they learning in overcrowded 
classrooms with no textbooks?
The challenge: ensure access while maintaining 
quality of schooling.

access to school through fees,” according to 
John Daniel, the former Assistant Director-
General for Education.
A POLICY SHIFT
While UNESCO focuses on the normative and 
policy front, UNICEF has launched a hands-on 
campaign to eliminate all primary education user 
fees in Africa. Cream Wright, UNICEF’s Chief 
of Education, explains why: “First, we have 
repeatedly seen that once you remove school fees, 
the demand for education soars. On the negative 
side, AIDS is leaving a wake of orphans while 
devastating the community and family networks 
that used to help poor kids go to school. Without 
drastic action, more and more children will have 
no chance.”
Even the World Bank has come around to 
encouraging countries to remove school fees. 
According to the Bank’s lead education specialist, 
Bob Prouty, Bank officials watched the African 
movement to abolish fees with skepticism that 
gave way to amazement. “These countries have 
achieved the biggest success in Education for All 
overnight,” comments Prouty.
UNEXPECTED COSTS
According to a 2001 World Bank survey in 
79 countries, only Algeria and Uruguay have 
no fees. In the rest, about one third of fees are 
“unofficial” or illegal (see box). Not included are 
indirect costs, like transportation (in Cambodia, 
21 percent of household spending goes on 
education) or opportunity costs that hit the 
poorest families sending their children to school 
instead of work.
There are also the “unexpected” costs, detailed 
in a recent report1 by the United Kingdom aid 
agency DFID comparing how very poor families 
cope with primary school costs in Bangladesh, 
Kenya, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Uganda and Zambia. 
Officially, primary school tuition fees are illegal in 
all six countries.
The case of Uganda, committed to providing 

free education, is most striking, as parents 
continue to pay a range of official fees as well as 
“unexpected” costs – teachers’ funerals, year-
end celebrations, classroom construction and 
telephone connections. Asked why pupils left 
primary school, 48% of parents cited inability 
to pay expenses. After food, education was the 
largest household expenditure in Uganda (and 
other countries, except for Nepal2).
ENSURING QUALITY
The authors don’t recommend fees, but 
conclude that “It is important for governments 
to recognize that the removal of tuition fees 
may result in schools having to insist on other 
charges.” In all countries surveyed, households 
routinely make sacrifices to continue paying for 
their children’s education. In Kenya, parents 
tend to skip meals, while in Sri Lanka, they defer 
medical treatment. But while cost is a major 
barrier, it is not alone in determining the demand 
for education.
In the decision to send children to school 
or not, parents also consider the question of 
quality. A World Bank survey of school fees in 79 
countries (see box p.17) found that poor families 
are theoretically willing to pay slightly more for 
education seen as “good”. But when standards 
are not up to expectations, parents stop making 
sacrifices to cover costs.
When Uganda abolished school fees in 1997, 
total net enrolment reached 84% but fell to 
76% by 2000. While it is too soon to draw firm 
conclusions, some experts argue that quality of 
education is to blame for dropout rates. 
Mary Pigozzi, Director of UNESCO’s Division 
for the Promotion of Quality Education, is 
concerned that countries are focusing exclusively 
on getting children into school without policies 
designed to keep them there. “There is a common 
misunderstanding that access to education must 
always precede attention to quality,” she says. 
“Quality clearly costs money but can we afford 
NOT to address it?”
SUPPORTING COUNTRIES 
For Katarina Tomasevski, the first Special 
Rapporteur on the Right to Education by the 
In Nepal, as well as 
school fees, parents 
often have to pay for 
books and uniforms
© Thomas Kelly/Gamma, Paris

gap is not about economics but the lack of 
international consensus to provide free primary 
education. “Look at the Millennium Development 
Goals – not a word about guaranteeing free 
education,” she says. She notes that governments 
that abolished fees are not getting firm pledges 
that their efforts to enroll and keep pupils at 
school will be rewarded by generous aid and 
debt relief.
This is where the World Bank is trying to step 
in, through its Fast-Track Initiative (FTI), an 
EFA financing initiative. A formally approved 
“credible” action plan is the basis for FTI 
eligibility, for which the Bank has developed a 
set of benchmarks based on characteristics of 
successful EFA countries. For example, a credible 
plan works towards directing 50 percent of the 
education budget to primary schooling. The 
benchmarks are supposed to inspire confidence in 
donors. 
“I think the FTI will provide a much better 
understanding of whether aid is moving to 
the right places,” says Steve Packer. But he 
is dubious about its mobilizing the resources 
which developing countries are now expecting. 
According to the Global Monitoring Report, 
about 5.6 billion dollars are needed each year to 
achieve universal primary education and gender 
parity.
Whether or not that money will arrive, 
countries are indeed lining up to join the FTI, 
with the number of eligible members expected to 
grow from 18 to more than 40 next year.
Abby Riddell, programme specialist on 
educational planning for UNESCO – which is 
an FTI partner advising governments on policy 
– lauds the World Bank initiative, but fears the 
quality of education is at risk.
THE ROLE OF AID
Riddell points to Malawi, Kenya, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. “In 
all five, you see similar visions of education,” 
she says, “but they are dealing with very 
different circumstances.” Uganda was able to 
abolish school fees in part by building on a 
tradition of decentralized government with truly 
representative local school boards. Zambia 
does not have this base, yet the policy reforms 
look the same.
The challenge lies in developing school 
systems that don’t simply try to catch up with 
industrialized countries. For that, Education 
Ministries will have to master the ‘budgetary 
speak’ of aid agencies to fund homegrown visions 
of quality learning.
Amy Otchet
(First published in UNESCO’s Education 
Today bulletin, July-September, 2004)
1. Reaching the Poor – The Costs of Sending Children 
to School, by Siobhan Boyle, Andy Brock, John Mace 
& Mo Sibbons, U.K. Department for International 
Development, August 2002.
2. Because of Nepal’s harsh winters, clothing costs 
outweigh education spending.
