of anti-retroviral drugs to those who are sick - has 
turned out to be particularly effective.
Currently, 140,000 Brazilians, or nearly all of 
those who are aware that they have the disease, 
are receiving free medication. Result: the AIDS-
related death rate has been cut in half since 1997. 
And contrary to what some people feared, the 
widespread access to treatment has not had an 
adverse effect on prevention. The number of new 
HIV infections stood at 22,000 in 2003, down from 
25,000 in the 1990s. In addition, the incidence of 
high-risk behavior has dropped. For example, the 
percentage of soldiers who use a condom when 
having sex with a paid partner increased from 69 
percent in 1999 to 77 percent in 2002.
“It’s impossible to carry out prevention efforts 



By combining prevention campaigns 
and free access to drug treatment, 
Brazil has successfully curbed the 
AIDS epidemic.
SHOCK THERAPY IN BRAZIL
E
xplosive. That was the word to describe the 
AIDS epidemic in Brazil. In 1992, the World 
Bank predicted that the number of cases 
would exceed one million in the year 2000. The 
demographic growth of Brazil, a country of nearly 
170 million people, heightened fears of an epidemic 
comparable to that sweeping Africa. But while 
Brazil is one of the countries in Latin America that 
has been hardest hit by the disease, with more than 
600,000 people living with HIV, the numbers are far 
below the catastrophic forecasts made 10 years ago. 
The country has even become a point of reference 
for numerous developing countries in the throes 
of the epidemic. The daring policy adopted by the 
authorities in Brasilia - based on active prevention 
campaigns and, since 1996, the free distribution 
© Alexandre Meneghini/AP/Sipa, Paris

today and not pay attention to treatment issues. 
It makes no sense to convince people to be 
careful if you don’t treat those who are sick,” says 
Alexandre Granjeiro, the national coordinator 
of Brazil’s program to fight AIDS and sexually 
transmitted diseases (STDs), which is overseen 
by the country’s health ministry. However, 
implementing such an innovative policy did not 
come easily. From 1997, Brazil began producing 
generic versions of anti-retroviral drugs that were 
not, or were no longer, protected by patents. For 
the treatments still under patent protection, the 
government battled it out with the world’s major 
pharmaceutical groups to obtain price cuts of 40 
to 70 percent.
400 MILLION CONDOMS
Meanwhile, prevention efforts were not neglected. 
Brazil distributes the most free condoms of any 
country in the world. Each year, the government 
offers some 400 million condoms to prison 
inmates, drug addicts, young people and military 
recruits. Beyond efforts targeting transsexuals, 
prostitutes, homosexuals and truck drivers, 
the health ministry runs a major nationwide 
awareness campaign three times a year. Two years 
ago, one television ad showed a guardian angel 
waiting for a young man to come home from a 
night out at Carnaval. Annoyed, the guardian 
angel told the young partygoer that he could not 
protect him from all his mistakes, and that he 
could certainly do nothing for him if he failed 
to use a condom. “Our policy is based on two 
ideas. The first aims to make information about 
HIV/AIDS widely available, the second aims to 
drive home the idea that using a condom is the 
most effective way to prevent infection,” explains 
Alexandre Granjeiro.
But Brazil’s success is also due to the 
mobilization of non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs). “This dynamic approach was a deciding 
factor because civil society can reach people that 
the government is not used to dealing with. And it 
so happens that in Brazil, as opposed to in other 
countries where they have to fight for their rights, 
transsexuals, prostitutes and homosexuals are 
very organized,” explains Cristina Raposo, who 
runs the AIDS programs at the UNESCO office in 
Brasilia.
The lack of taboos about sex in Brazilian society 
was also a definite plus. With UNESCO’s help, 
the government recently launched a pilot program 
to hand out condoms in high schools. The goal 
is that by 2006, some 2.5 million teenagers will 
have access to them. Elsewhere, such an initiative 
would have caused a major stir. In Brazil, no one 
said anything at all.
Lisandra Paraguassu 
in Brasilia
Since 1997, Brazil 
has been producing 
generic versions of 
anti-retroviral drugs 
that are not, or no 
longer, patented
All patients in Brazil 
get free medicine. 
Result: the mortality 
rate from AIDS has 
been cut in half 
since 1997
© Alexandre Meneghini/AP/Sipa, Paris
