Panapase Nelisoni has an unusual responsibility. 
Not many government secretaries are charged 
with planning for the end of their nations. 
Yet Tuvalu faces an unusual threat, possibly 
unprecedented in human history – the 
geographical disappearance of the entire island 
For six months of the 
year some Tuvaluans 
now have wet feet at 
high tide 

The coral islands of Tuvalu in the Pacific Ocean, like the Maldives in the 
Indian Ocean, are set to disappear as sea level rises with global warming

flood from the inside out. By the time the tide 
started to ebb away again, the water had reached 
a foot deep across wide areas.
Hilia Vavae, Tuvalu’s senior meteorologist, 
was splashing through the waters that had 
surrounded her office. “The floods have increased 
tremendously,” she said. “Last year we were 
flooding during the high tides of November, 
December, January, February and March. When 
I first started work in the Met Office in 1981, you 
would normally see it in February only.”
There are other signs of rising sea levels, too. 
Pit plantations of pulaka, a root vegetable like 
taro, have been suffering from saltwater intrusion. 
In some places three-quarters of the plants 
have died, leaving people reliant on imported 
foodstuffs. Meanwhile, Tepuka Savilivili, a small 
island on the rim of Funafuti atoll, was washed 
over by waves a few years ago and its vegetation 
destroyed. Tuvaluans consider it a harbinger of 
what is to come for the rest of their homeland. 
COASTAL AREAS AT RISK
Even so, some sceptics accuse the Tuvaluans of 
being the architects of their own fate, suggesting 
In 50 years the 
Pacific Ocean could 
look very different, 
as islands disappear
that overpopulation, groundwater extraction or 
the mining of offshore sand from the seabed 
could be to blame for the problems of flooding 
and erosion, rather than sea-level rise. But the 
islanders point out that some of the worst erosion 
is taking place on uninhabited areas of the atolls, 
far from any human disturbance. 
Indeed, the impact of sea level rise is now 
visible in low-lying areas around the world. And 
coral atolls, which average as little as half a 
metre above sea level, are particularly vulnerable. 
According to Professor Patrick Nunn, an expert in 
ocean geoscience at the University of the South 
Pacific in Fiji, current sea level rise is between 
1 and 2mm a year. The UN Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change predicts further rises of 
between 9 and 88cm over the next century. 
“Many low-lying coastal areas are going to 
disappear,” predicted Professor Nunn. “In fifty 
years’ time the geography of the Pacific region will 
be quite different to the way it is today.”
Mark Lynas
