(Top) How long 
will these children 
of Yenaoloul 
on the island of 
Tanna be safe from 
westernisation?
Vanuatu (in Melanesia) is probably the 
most culturally diverse country anywhere. 
A unique network of fieldworkers is helping 
keep traditional customs alive and well. 
Bosen Napu leads us in single file through the 
rainforest, and down the steep, winding path of 
a canyon, leaving the coast far behind us. It is 
best to walk barefoot, he says, for a better grip 
on the black, volcanic earth. When we finally get 
to the bottom, we immediately start the near-
vertical climb up the other side, until we reach 
a wide clearing shaded by giant banyan trees. 
Men and boys are sitting around, wearing only 
their tradiional nambas or penis sheaths. This 
is a nakamal, a sacred meeting and dancing 
space where ancient paths cross, up in the cool 
mountains of Tanna, in the south of Vanuatu.
Unknown to me, every step we take is not only 
following a physical path between nakamals. 
It is also retracing and re-affirming a multitude 
of other relationships – bonds of kinship, social 
ties and personal genealogies, going back to the 
‘sacred stones’ from which these people say they 
originally came. Almost every tree, stone, animal 
and place we pass is invested with layers of 
meaning. 
Bosen is a cultural fieldworker, one of 60 men 
and 40 women volunteers in a programme started 
by the Vanuatu Cultural Centre in the late 1970’s 
to document, preserve and promote the country’s 
oral history, and especially what is known as 
kastom. This is loosely translated as ‘tradition’, 
but in fact, is much more. Indeed, when Vanuatu 
(formerly the New Hebrides) won independence 
from the British and French condominium in 
1980, kastom was the rallying call that united the 
13 main islands and 70 islets in this Melanesian 
archipelago, with their 100 or so languages and 
almost as many cultural variations. 
KEEPING KASTOM
The ceremonial expression of kastom is still 
very much alive, and varies from the islands in the 
north, like Santo, Ambae, Pentecost and Malakula, 
to the southern islands of Efate, Erromango, and 
Tanna. In the north, as men (and in some islands, 
women) gain wealth, they can elect to rise in 
status through ‘grade-taking’ ceremonies, using 
pigs’ tusks, woven mats, yams and kava (a root 
used to make a sacred drink at the heart of male 
society throughout much of Vanuatu), as payment. 
In the south, while pigs, mats, kava and yams are 
also favoured forms of exchange, society is not 
so obviously hierarchical – and the pig is more 
important than its tusks.

But, as Bosen explains, kastom is much 
more than the flamboyant ceremonies, which 
can involve hundreds of people and years of 
preparation. “In the end, it comes down to peace 
and respect,” he says. And traditional practices 
are, in one way or another, a means to preserve 
harmony, whether between generations, families, 
or simply to maintain human life in balance with 
the rest of nature.
Kastom has come under various assaults since 
white men first came to stay, in the mid-19th 
century. The islands had been visited briefly 
by the Portuguese navigator, de Quiros in 1606, 
then the Frenchman Bougainville in 1766 and 
Englishman James Cook in 1774, who charted 
the islands. But it was Catholic, Presbyterian and 
Anglican missionaries from the 1860s onward, 
who, after meeting fierce resistance, persuaded 
converts to turn away from kastom. Later, 
British and French colonial rule also discouraged 
traditional practices. Today, a great threat to 
kastom is school (see page 40). 
FIELDWORKER PROGRAMME
Even in remote Yenaoloul, where Bosen has 
taken me, not so long ago the people were also 
wearing white men’s clothes, but returned to 
their traditions. And as a young man, he, himself, 
left Tanna to work in an abattoir in the nation’s 
capital, Port Vila, on Efate island. But, he says “I 
just worked and sweated and ate bad food.” He 
decided to return home.
In 1990, one of the island’s chiefs asked Bosen 
to represent his part of Tanna as fieldworker for 
the Vanuatu Cultural Centre. The Centre gave 
him a tape-recorder, batteries and cassettes, 
and basic training in maintenance, as well as 
in ethnographic fieldwork, like drawing kinship 
diagrams, family trees, and writing word lists. 
“I walk from nakamal to nakamal,” says Bosen. 
“I just ask people if they are leading a kastom way 
of life. If they are, I talk to them and record their 
stories. I don’t criticise. We have a story about a 
man who goes fishing for turtles and climbs on a 
rock to get a better view. It is only when it moves 
that he realises he has been standing on a turtle 
all the time. So I remind people, ‘everything you 
need is at your feet.’”
Every year, Bosen goes to Port Vila for a two-
week training and exchange workshop with all 
the fieldworkers from other islands. Running since 
1982, each workshop focuses on a different topic 
using materials gathered during the year, and 
presented by the fieldworkers. This year the topic 
is language. Last year it was ‘traditional ways of 
bringing up children’. The women fieldworkers 
hold their own workshop two weeks before the 
men.
A BANK FOR CULTURE
Back in Port Vila, Ambong Thompson, originally 
from Malakula, is in charge of audio archives 
at the Cultural Centre. “After completing their 
recordings, the fieldworkers send their cassettes 
back here,” he explains. He labels each cassette 
and catalogues it in a computer database, before 
storing it in the air-conditioned ‘tabu room’, 
so-called because some of the cassettes contain 
secret knowledge, only for certain members of a 
family, or clan, for example. “The tabu room is 
like a bank to us, where we store all our cultural 
knowledge,” he says.
The cultural centre has also been building up 
its video archives in recent years. “Now,” says 
Ralph Regenvanu, director of the Cultural Centre, 
“we have far more requests to film events than we 
can meet, as we don’t have the resources to cover 
the transport costs to get there.” But the solution, 
says Regenvanu, is not always extra funding. “It’s 
more an issue of training fieldworkers to use the 
equipment, so that when an event happens, we 
just pack a camera in a box and send it to them, 
so they do the filming.”
(Top) Only men are 
usually allowed in 
the nakamal meeting 
places
(Bottom) Ambong 
Thompson has over 
1000 audio tapes 
of oral history to 
archive on CD

Four years ago, grants from UNESCO were 
used to purchase professional digital video 
cameras and an editing suite, so that the Centre 
can make broadcast-quality documentaries. “All 
the emphasis has been on the archives,” says 
Regenvanu. “We have now reached a stage in the 
development of our country where we need to 
start pushing the material back out to the people, 
to raise awareness about culture.” 
Twice a month the Cultural Centre has a slot 
on national television. And, with over 20 years 
of radio broadcasting experience behind him, 
Ambong also makes a weekly programme for 
national radio, using recordings from the archives 
and phone calls from fieldworkers and other 
islanders about their culture.
“People are moving away from kastom,” 
says Jacob Kerere, head of the Centre’s audio-
visual archives and chief cameraman. “But the 
programmes we make help bring them back. I’d 
say the future is bright.” 

