Pioneer newspaperwoman, airtisia 'ery
activist, lawyer, leader of thé emigration
movement to Canada, recruiter oî Bteck
ssldiers during thé Civil War, Mary Aniî
Sfeadd Cary contributed significantly to tl
saceess of aboiitioiiist causes. A escendant
of thé Shadd îsmiîy telis tfie story
great-aunt.
1850, thé American Congress passed
a bill known as thé Fugitive Slave Act.
It stipulated that any white persan
could arrest and detain anyone of African descent
suspected of being a runaway slave. Even those
who had been bom free, unless they had irréfutable
proof, were at risk of being captured and dragged
into bondage. As a result, thousands of African
Americans picked up and fled thé northern states.
For many, this destination was Canada. It was a
phénoménal movement of refugees on what was
known as thé Underground Railroad: 20,000 people
are estimated to hâve settled in Canada between
1820 and 1860.
At thé time of thé fugitive slave law, Mary Ami

-V
Shadd, a young freeborn woman, was a teacher in
thé northeastern United States. Mary Ann was born
in Delaware in 1823 into a prominent abolitionist
family. When her services were requested by
Henry and Mary Bibb, founders of thé first Black
newspaper in Canada, Voice of thé Fiigitive, she
moved to Windsor (Ontario) and started a school
in 1851 for thé children of fugitive slaves. She also
quickly became a leading emigrationist, hiding
numerous fugitives in her home.
In 1852, she published A Plea for Emigration;
or Notes of Canada West which touted thé country
as a major refuge not only for escaping slaves but
also free African Americans experiencing increasing
restrictions on their lives in northern states. Her
skills as an orator convinced many, but her public
outspokenness got her into trouble. A dispute with
thé Bibbs aver thé question of separate schools for
Blacks spilled onto thé pages of their newspaper, thé
Voice of thé Fugitive, and led to her firing from her
teaching position.
Shadd than decided to start her own weekly,
where she could control how her ideas were
disseminated. One of Canada's first women
journalists thus became thé first Black woman in
North America to found a newspaper. Thé Provincial
Freeman began publishing out of Toronto on March
24, 1853. Because she was aware that her name
on thé masthead could alienate a leadership that
preferred thé strict gender codes of thé 19th century,
she had asked Samuel Ringgold Ward, Black
abolitionist and agent of thé Anti-Slavery Society of
Canada, to become editor. Shadd then spent a year
on thé lecture circuit drumming up subscriptions
and interest in her paper, which became a daily thé
following year.
First and foremost, thé Provincial Freeman was
an anti-slavery paper. It focused on thé importance
of Black self-reliance and intégration into Canadian
society and denounced thé practice of "begging,"
or fundraising on behalf of thé "downtrodden
fugitives" by presenting them in an unfavorable
light. It also championed women's rights, providing
a forum for activists Lucy Stone Blackwell and
Lucretia Mott.
Yet in spite of its success, thé paper could not
stay afloat, dépendent for its readership upon
a small educated élite. In 1860, it succumbed.
Seven years of publishing a newspaper under
such circumstances was nonetheless quite an
BAHAWAV froni llx- sub»rriliff. <u»
!hc nisltt urthc st«l ÎB-laitl, s» uysn, mau,
whc ealb )tHti»i-tif M«»cy ..?&y, iibuitl 3s»
/i'ar» »Ed, S fept « or H inrh;» bij;b, iir-
dinar» colw» «.B»I|CT «.hruhy tiuHt; hv'.hf
bnxl, IÎB. I UH» it ilh-tdfd inui..tt) 'ou BBP
îwet"'i<t 'tt''"!*? l». *'..?..* ulwly'couilx-d;
bB» l»<wn rs>(M. <( (" (tai h»B»«-, Rnd l» a Ïrit
rrfç <tttiîug"r»»m >wr<ati<, 'at, <i »g» ma
ft'crn IM fx;tisïlllr toy (,>; innn<Ïs7~ Ï
::ex(M",''i 1 '?. '".nsn . «»ui»îi)l- ti-îhiïl»
.Vtfinilti- l»rf, tSijt,
l^îë'^S
«Itefï'. i.ïi, '?!;^"'- """""a bf m.im
A bonnty wes offered for
rimsway slawe cauglit
achievement and places it among a very smjll gruup
of Black publications, including Frederick Douglass's
newspapers. It is today a valuable resource for
researchers.
After thé death of her husband Thomas F. Cary,
a Toronto businessman she married in 1856, Shadd
Cary left Canada with her two children. Hired by
Martin Delany as perhaps thé only woman to recruit
Black soldiers during thé Civil War, she later went
on to study and practice law in Washington D. C.,
being one of thé first women of her race to do so.
She also became increasingly vocal and active on
thé issue of women's rights and suffrage during her
later years.
Shadd Cary died on June S, 1893. A woman who
pushed thé boundaries and limitations normally
ascribed ta her race and sex, she was designated a
persan of national historié significance in Canada,
one of a number of posthumous honors she
received.
Shadd's descendants, and those of her brothers
and sisters, live ail over Canada and thé United
States today. l am one of those descendants
who hâve become active in thé résurrection and
préservation of thé memory not only of Mary Ann
Shadd but of thé thousands of others who made
Canada home during Aat period.
Mrienne Shadd,
writer, researcher and curator
living in Toronto
