FICTIONAL PREVENTION
▲
Amidst romantic intrigue and 
action scenes, television series are 
promoting prevention without being 
obvious. With surprising results in 
the ratings. 
W
ill Sipho, handsome black male nurse, 
fall for sexy Ayanda, a doctor in the clinic 
where he works, or go back to his ex-
girlfriend Chantal? The question kept South African 
TV viewers on the edge of their seats for weeks. 
Young and seductive, members of the post-apartheid 
society, the characters of the series “Soul City” know 
the pitfalls of love and betrayal. But what really 
sets this soap opera apart is that on the fringes of 
the usual romance novel plot, it brings up serious 
issues, the most prominent being AIDS. In this case, 
Sipho, who finally proposes to Chantal, learns that 
she is HIV-positive. Initially, he is shocked by the 
news, but finally decides to stay with her.
Since it was first aired in 1994, “Soul City” has 
known unflagging popularity. Every week more 
than 13 million viewers, most of them black, are 
glued to their screens. And yet the series was 
invented not by a screenwriter or a network, but 
by an NGO. The production and creative aspects 
are the work of a private television company, 
but the content is defined by the eminently 
serious Institute for Health and Development 
Communication (IHDC).
“Every episode takes a great deal of 
preparation,” explains Sue Goldstein, director 
of research at IHDC. “We organize outside 
discussion groups on a regular basis, preferably in 
underprivileged areas. That’s where we identify 
issues. Then we work with the producers and 
The detective in the 
Indian series Jasoos 
Vijay is brave, sexy 
and…HIV positive

screenwriters to incorporate them into the series.” 
Once the script has been written, it is presented 
to discussion groups, community activists and 
people living with HIV for further assessment. 
The result is a high level of realism that mixed 
with a skilfully concocted romantic intrigue 
has succeeded in attracting millions of regular 
viewers.
A HIT WITH VIEWERS
“Soul City ”is not the only TV series to blend 
education and entertainment. In the last several 
years, fiction has increasingly been used to 
communicate messages about prevention, with 
unexpected ratings success. In India, the series 
“Jasoos Vijay”, aired every Sunday night for the 
last two years, is now one of the most watched 
TV shows in the country. The detective Jasoos 
Vijay is typically brave, he likes action, he flirts 
with his pretty female partner and he always 
gets the bad guy. This hero, who is very popular 
in India’s rural areas, does have one unusual 
characteristic for the genre: he is HIV-positive. 
In Brazil, homeland of the telenovela, AIDS has 
also made its appearance in certain soap operas. 
“Malhaçao”, show for young audiences, increased 
its ratings after one of the adolescents in the 
series found out that he was HIV-positive.
Popular as they are, television series are an 
excellent means of conveying information, 
particularly because they do not address the 
rational part of our personalities. “Issues that have 
to do with love and sex depend on very complex 
emotional processes,” explains Sue Goldstein. 
“It is not enough to tell people ‘you have to use 
condoms’ to make them do it. But a series can 
explore sexual questions in all their emotional 
complexity.” Programs of this kind elicit strong 
feelings of identification with the characters 
and situations, adds Mary Myers, independent 
consultant in communication development and 
author of a study on the topic. “This identification 
facilitates discussion and can help bring about 
changes in behaviour.”
There is evidence that these shows have 
impact. In Japan, while the series “Kamisama Mo 
Sukoshidake” was on the air, portraying a female 
student who becomes infected with the virus 
after prostituting herself, the number of HIV tests 
doubled. Another example: a poll of TV viewers in 
Cote d’Ivoire showed that those who had watched 
at least ten episodes of the series “Sida dans la 
Because they are so 
popular, television 
series are an 
excellent means of 
information
Photos © Doordarshan/BBC World SErvice Trust/National AIDS Control Organisation 

Cité” were much more likely to use a condom 
than those who hadn’t.
FINANCING FROM DONORS
Consequently, soap operas are being taken 
seriously by funding agencies, which are a main 
source of financing. The Institute for Health and 
Development Communication, creator of “Soul 
City”, gets most of its budget from foreign donors 
like the European Union, Japan or Great Britain. 
The Indian series “Jasoos Vijay” was made thanks 
to the sponsorship of the National Aids Control 
Organization (NACO) and the BBC World Service 
Trust.
Television series can therefore succeed where 
many official campaigns have failed, but only 
if health and social structures are keeping up 
with them. “To reach their goal, producers must 
cooperate with the health services and with actors 
in the community,” stresses Mary Myers. “It’s 
useless for the hero of a TV series to demonstrate 
the importance of getting tested if the test is 
unavailable or beyond the means of the majority 
of viewers.”
Agnès Bardon
The South African 
series Soul city was 
one of the first to mix 
entertainment with 
information
