More children are going to
sckool, thé gender ratio is
improving and resouros
for éducation are tending
to increase. Quality of
éducation, however, is
still significantly lacking
in many régions of thé
world. Thèse are some of
thé conclusions of thé 2005
édition of thé Education
for AU Global Monitoring
Report.
n
'ducafcâo for Ai!
AL8TY
news: More children are going
to school than ever before. But
unfortunately, many drop out before grade 5 of
primary school or graduate without mastering
even a minimum set of cognitive skills, concludes
thé 2005 Education for Ail Global Monitoring
Report, launched November 8 in Brasilia (Brazil).
Thé Report, which monitors progress towards
thé six Education for Ail goals* set by aver 160
countries at thé World Education Forum in Dakar
(2000), finds that significant efforts are being
made to increase resources, broaden access to
school and improve gender parity. However,
exhaustive analysis of research data shows that

thé quality of éducation Systems is failing children
in many parts of thé world, and could prevent
many countries from achieving Education for AU
bythetargetdateof2015.
In one third of countries with data, for example,
less than 75 percent of students reach grade
5. National and international assessments also
show that performance levels and very weak in
low and middle-income countries and among
disadvantaged groups in some industrialized
nations.
"Overcrowded classes, poorly qualified teachers
and ill-equipped schools with scant learning
materials remain ail too familiar pictures in
many countries, " said UNESCO Director-General
Koïchiro Matsuura. "Yet, achieving éducation
for ail fundamentally relies on assuring décent
quality: what children learn and how they learn
can make or break their school expérience and
their subséquent opportunities for life."
DEVELOPMENT INDEX
Thé importance of quality is reflected in thé
report's EFA Development Index, which measures
thé overall progress of 127 countries towards
EFA. Thé Index is based on indicators for thé four
most measurable Dakar goals: universal primary
éducation, adult literacy, éducation quality as
proxied by survival rate of pupils to grade 5 and
^ender parity.
Norway, Denmark and thé Netherlands head a
list of 4l countries at thé top of thé Index, which
hâve achieved or nearly achieved thé four goals.
Almost ail are in North America and Western,
Central and Eastern Europe, except for a few
in Latin America and thé Caribbean, such as
Argentina, Cuba and Chile, and five small island
states.
They are followed by another 51 countries,
headed by Remania, Bulgaria and Costa Rica
and including many of thé Arab States and thé
countries of Latin America, which are well on thé
way to achieving some of thé goals, but are being
held back by slow progress on others, notably
quality.
Finally, a third group of 35 countries, 22 of
them in sub-Saharan Africa, but also including
thé high population countries of Bangladesh,
India and Pakistan, are "very far from achieving
thé goals", with "multiple challenges to tackle
simultaneously if EFA is to be assured."
Thé report provides a detailed analysis of thé
key factors influencing thé quality of éducation,
including financial and material resources for
schools, teacher numbers and their training, core
subjects, pedagogy, language, thé amount of
actual learning time, facilities and leadership.
There is a clear upward trend on many of
thèse fronts. Education spending, for example,
has increased aver thé past décade in many
developing countries, and access to éducation
continues to improve. But there are still 103.5
million out-of-school children, a figure that is
declining too slowly to achieve universal primary
éducation by 2015. Thé report also emphasizes
that improved access has not beea matched by an
expansion of educational facilities and resources.
INSUFFICIENTTRAINING
FORTEACHERS
This is most notable, for example, with teachers,
who, thé report emphasizes, "are thé stroagest
influence on learning. " In many low-income
countries, teachers do not meet even thé
minimum standards for thé profession. In Togo,
for example, only two percent of teachers met thé
minimum national standard of lower secondary
éducation. In Botswana, where thé standard was
an upper secondary éducation for teaching in
primary, only 10 percent of teachers made thé
grade. Similariy, a récent study of seven Southern
African countries, cited by thé Report, "found
that some primary school mathematics teachers
LikeNorway. 41
countries are on thé
verge of reaching
four EFA goals (left)
India is among
siatesstillfarfrom
reaching EFA goals
.a e

Thé Education for Ail
Global Monitoring Report is
prepared byan independent
international team based at
UNESCO Headquarters in
Paris (France). It is part of
thé follow-up to thé World
Education Forum held in
Dakar (Sénégal, 2000), and
benefits from thé advice of
international editorial board.
Itisfundedby UNESCO
and a number of bilatéral
agencies.
Its findings will be serve
as thé basis for discussions
at thé Fourth High-Level
Group Meeting on Education
for Ail (Brasilia, November
4-10). Thissmall, flexibie
group comprising high-level
leaders from governments
and civil society in
developing and developed
countries, serves as a lever
for political commitment
and technical and financial
resource mobilisation
for EFA. Informed by
thé Global Monitoring
Report, it also provides
an opportunity to hold thé
global communityto account
for commitments made at
thé Dakar Forum.
Thé Report présents
cassstudiesjorll
countries, including
Brazii
possessed only basic numeracy and actually
scored lower than students on thé same tests."
Too often, thèse poorly trained, teachers must
also face over-crowded classrooms. Thé report
finds that in countries with thé highest pupil/
teacher ratios, "barely one third of students who
start primary reach grade S. " In many countries
of sub-Saharan Africa and South and West Asia,
where éducation has expanded rapidly aver thé
past décade, pupil/teacher ratios hâve actually
risen. In most countries of thèse régions, thé
number of pupils per teacher exceeds 40 in
primary éducation and climbs above 60 in several
cases, including Malawi, Mozambique, Central
African Republic and Chad. Furthermore, in many
low-income countries, teachers' real wages hâve
declined relative ti average incomes and their
earnings are too low to provide an acceptable
standard of living.
HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC:
UNDERMINING EDUCATION
Thé HIV/AIDS pandemic is another factor
"severely undermining" thé quality of éducation,
states thé report. In Zambia, for example, an
estimated 815 primary school teachers died of
AIDS in 2001, "corresponding to 45 percent of
teachers trained that year. " Across sub-Saharan
Africa, "more than 11 million children under
thé âge of 15 hâve lost at least one parent to
HIV/AIDS". "Their opportunities to learn" points
out thé report, "are often curtailed by thé need
to care for sick family members or contribute to
household income."
Thé Report présents case studies from 11
countries (Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Cuba, Egypt, Finland, Republic of Korea, Sénégal,
South Africa and Sri Lanka) showing how both
rich and developing nations are tackling thé
quality issue. It also proposes a séries of policy
measures to improve thé quality of éducation,
emphasizing that although "there are no universal
recipes, a robust long-term vision for éducation,
strong government leadership and a motivated,
well-supported teaching corps are conditions for
successful qualitative reforms."
Thé international community has a crucial rôle
to play in supporting this process. Récent pledges
may double thé amount of aid to basic éducation
to about US$3-3.5 billion by 2006, but even this
figure falls short of thé estimated US$7 billion
per year required for achieving universal primary
éducation by 2015.
Sue Williams
