It’s not always easy to reconcile 
conservation with the needs of poor 
communities that depend on reef resources
Sixty-year-old Landau pulls himself across the 
terrace of his house on his stomach, using his 
muscular arms. He lost both his legs in an accident 
12 years ago. So it’s hard to believe that, to 
survive, he mines coral from Langira reef off the 
Indonesian island of Kaledupa, where he lives. 
When he sets out every day, his wife, Pende, has 
to help him into his canoe. But for the past few 
weeks it has been out of the water with a hole in 
its side, so they’ve had to live off shellfish gathered 
from the shallow waters near their village. Once 
they’ve fed themselves, there is little left over to 
sell. And their children left a long time ago to work 
on fishing vessels in Malaysia, where salaries are 
much higher. 
“I normally mine two or three times a week,” 
says Landau, “and bring home a whole canoe 
full of coral.” Most is used on the island itself, as 
building material. “I started to mine when I needed 
a foundation for my house,” explains Landau. 
“Nowadays I also sell some in the next village.” 
The average price straight from the canoe is around 
40,000 rupiahs per cubic metre (about US$5).
Most houses in his village, Sampela, are built 
over the water, on coral or wooden piles three 
metres high. With about 1000 inhabitants living 
in 300 houses that means a lot of coral. And the 
population is growing. “I’d like to start using 
cement,” says Landau, “but I don’t know how 
to make it. And anyway, coral doesn’t cost 
anything.” 
When Kaledupa became part of the Wakatobi 
Marine Park, in 1995, some local people were 
appointed as rangers, to stop coral mining and 
to teach islanders how to use cement or rock 
quarried from the centre of the island. “Our 
message is: don’t mine live coral, it’s home for 
the fish!” explains Djuffri, one of these rangers, 
as he sits down on a couch full of holes, lights 
a cigarette and blows out the smoke. “We prefer 
to educate people instead of punishing them,” 
he explains. Djuffri and his colleague, Udi, are 
part of a team of twenty Wakatobi park rangers, 
patrolling the reefs with speedboats once a day. 
“We see coral miners every day,” says Udi. 
The message is slowly sinking in. “I used to 
mine live coral,” says Landau, “but now I know 
it weakens the reef and takes away the holes 
the fish use as their home. I stick to mining 
only dead coral and coral stone nowadays.” But 
few islanders know that mining dead coral is 
also prohibited in the Marine Park. And, says 
ranger Udi, “we concentrate more on the ban on 
mining live coral. We often turn a blind eye to 
people mining dead coral.” And the punishments 
for offenders are not very severe - often just a 
warning, whereas illegal fishing carries a prison 
sentence. 
Even when it comes to live coral mining, 
ancient animistic beliefs can sometimes be 
as influential as the rangers. “The reef has its 
own spirit,” says Landau. Once, he says, a man 
collapsed on the ground in agony and died when 
11
A boatload of coral rock sells for 
US$5. But it leaves fish homeless
On Kaledupa Island, 
houses are often 
built on coral rock

he returned form coral mining. “The spirit of the 
reef took revenge on him because he had been 
mining coral” he says. “But this hasn’t stopped us 
going back to the same reef.” 
SEAWEED SALVATION
Meanwhile, some islanders are abandoning coral 
mining to cultivate seaweed. But, at least for 
Harudu, a coral miner from neighbouring Ambeua 
village, the motivation seems to be economic 
rather than ecological, or fear of the rangers. “I 
started coral mining 10 years ago,” he explains. 
“In the busiest times I mined one cubic meter 
a trip. Neither the rangers, nor the marine park 
scientists scared me. Sometimes I mined just 
outside the marine research station. But these 
days I cultivate seaweed full-time and mine coral 
only now and then, mainly for my own use.” 
Indeed, a strong smell of seaweed greets the 
visitor in front of Harudu’s house, as a huge pile 
dries on a wooden table. 
Over the past five years seaweed cultivation 
has increased in the Wakatobi Marine Park, with 
harvests every two months or so. During the rainy 
season (December to March), they can harvest 
1000 kg of algae, compared to around 300 kg in 
the dry season, selling it for about 3100 rupiahs 
(about US$0.30) a kilo. Even if the price of coral 
has doubled over the past two years, explains 
Harudu, it still pays less than he can earn from 
seaweed – and it’s a lot harder work. But the cost 
of setting up a seaweed farm – US$100 or more 
– is beyond the means of most islanders. The 
Indonesian Fisheries Ministry has started a loan 
system, but so far has only helped set up a few 
seaweed farms. 
Despite these changes, islanders cannot build 
their houses on seaweed. Most do not know 
how to use cement, and there are no trucks to 
transport rock quarried on the island. Which, for 
the time being, leaves little alternative to coral. 
Jessica Haapkylä
