act u yr
Endangered by civil war, deforestation and poaching, certain
animal species living in thé Démocratie Republic of Congo
are now down to a few individuals. If nothing is done,
thé bonobo, thé mountain gorilla and thé Northem White
Rhinocéros will vanish. UNESCO sounds thé alarm.
Gorilla and elephant
skuilsfound in
Kahuzi-Biega Park
inDRC
onsidered thé "world's second green lung"
after thé Amazon, thé Démocratie Republic
of Congo (DRC) is home to a number of
animal species that are now under threat. For
that reason, UNESCO rallied ail of its Member
States and partners in September to join a major
international campaign to support thé DRC's rich
natural héritage. This western African country
has five sites inscribed on thé World Héritage List
and thé World Héritage in Danger List that are
thé habitat of emblematic species and sub-species
such as thé bonobo, thé okapi, thé mountain
gorilla and thé Northern White Rhinocéros.
No other African country can boast such a
variety of animal and plant species. One reason
is thé diversity of climates and ecosystems:
tropical forest, deciduous forest, savannah,
mangrove, swamps, and a whole range of rivers,

UNESCO hosted thé
"Nature and culture
in DRC" exhibition,
created by thé Royal
Muséum for Central
Africa in Tervuren,
Belgium
In response to thé
risk of extinction
of a number of
species. UNESCO
and thé United
Nations Foundation
launched a project to
safeguard ths DRC's
*ive World Héritage
sites
survive.
Another problem: thé white
rhinocéros seems unable to
reproduce successfully in
captivity. In 2000, a femate
rhinocéros was born in a zoo
in Dvur Kralove, in thé Czech
Republic, but that was thé first
birth for ten years. What can be
done? In July, a meeting was
held in Nairobi to deveiop an
emergency strategy to save thé
species. Thé managers of thé
ticking for thé white rhinocéros:
"If nothing is done in thé very
near future, thé Démocratie
Republic of Congo could hâve
thé sad privilège of being thé
first country in thé 21st century
to expérience thé extinction of a
large mammal species."
mountains, volcanoes and lakes. Thé civil war
and instability in thé Gréât Lakes région are
endangering thé conservation of thèse species,
which are threatened by de-forestation, poaching,
thé movement of refugees or thé illégal extraction
of ore.
In an attempt to reduce this damage, UNESCO
and thé United Nations Foundation launched a
Project in 2000 called "Biodiversity Conservation
in Régions of Armed Conûict: Conserving World
Héritage Sites in thé DRC", aiming to préserve
thé sites in their entirety in a country embroiled
in war. This programme used 62 percent of
its budget of three million dollars to pay thé
salaries of thé park wardens, who sometimes risk
their lives to protect thé parks. This intensive
surveillance of thé sites has, for example, allowed
thé mountain gorilla population to rise from
325 individuals at thé start of thé programme
to 355 aow. Thé staff of thé parks hâve also
benefited from training programmes to help them
deal with thé crisis. Another important part of this
alliance, which thé DRC governmeat and several
conservation organisations active in thé DRC hâve
joined, has been thé launch of a "diplomacy of
conservation". Its main achievement has been
to develop links and contact with ail belligerent
parties.
Thé event in Paris, which took place from
September 14 to 26, included an international

donors conférence. Thé countries and institutions
taking part made commitments to donate 50
million dollars, which will prolong several
programmes. More specifically, 3. 5 million dollars
pledged by thé governments of Belgium and Italy
as well as thé United Nations Foundation and thé
Wildlife Conservation Society will fund thé second
phase of thé programme launched in 2000. Arthur
Z'Ahidi N'Goma, one of thé four Vice-Presidents
of thé DRC's government of national unity,
pledged to do everything possible to stop thé
dévastation of thé forest and to keep troops and
displaced people away from thé protected areas.
Other events were aimed at thé wider public:
UNESCO hosted an exhibition organised by thé
Royal Muséum for Central Africa in Tervuren,
Belgium, and a charity concert featuring rumba
music and other traditional Congolese rhythms.
Thé programme established in DRC by
UNESCO and thé UNF can serve in future as a
model for thé protection of héritage in times of
conflict. Meanwhile, thé survival of a number
of threatened species dépends on thé initiative's
success.
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz
