Women are not only 
more vulnerable 
to the disease 
physiologically, 
they are also more 
fragile socially. Yet 
AIDS prevention 
programmes have 
been slow to focus 
specifically on their 
needs.
A NEW KIND OF VIRUS
role to play in treatment education.
Furthermore, as part of its cooperation with UNAIDS, UNESCO 
has launched a new initiative that consists of providing 
education ministries with a “tool kit” of methods that have been 
tested and can be adapted to different contexts and countries.
This presupposes, however, political will at the highest level. 
What can be done when the political will is lacking?
When political leaders are elected, voters have a chance to act. 
What is essential, in all cases, is to succeed in breaking the 
silence. The Ugandan government has done this very effectively. 
It is an example to countries most affected by the virus. The 
media also has an important role to play. Everyone has to be 
made aware that HIV/AIDS is not somebody else’s problem. Very 
often, people start to feel concerned only when the disease hits 
those close to them. We have to get the message across before 
the situation becomes that dire.
“M
any of my friends would be 
alive today if they’d been 
as lucky as me,” Angeline 
Mugwendere states bluntly. A 24-year-old woman 
from Zimbabwe, now head of an organization that 
assists young women in rural areas, she knows she 
is privileged. An NGO paid her school fees, giving 
her access to secondary education. Some of her 
friends had no other choice but to give in to the 
advances of “sugar daddies”, older and wealthier, to 
finance their studies. That was how several of them 
contracted the virus.
Such stories are tragically commonplace. Ten 
years ago, women were less affected by the 
disease than men, but the trend has reversed 
in certain regions. In sub-Saharan Africa, 58% 
of the 29.4 million people now living with 
HIV/AIDS are women. The risk of infection for 
young African women is 2.5% per cent higher 

than for men. More vulnerable biologically – the 
risk of contamination from a man to a woman 
is estimated at twice that of a woman to a man 
– they are also more vulnerable socially.
The reason: in societies where men are 
dominant, women have little freedom of choice. 
“Young women like me who grow up in rural 
areas learn to be quiet and obedient, to work on 
the farm and around the house, to get married 
early and have children. That kind of education 
considerably reduces their capacity to negotiate 
with men,” confirms Angeline Mungwendere. 
Marriage does not protect them. Many women are 
infected by their husbands or steady boyfriends. 
A recent study conducted in Zimbabwe shows 
that only 11% of the women questioned thought 
they had the right to ask their husband to use a 
condom, even when the husband was unfaithful 
and HIV-positive.
PROGRAMMES NEED TO ADAPT 
TO WOMEN’S SITUATION
Yet prevention programmes have taken a long 
time to address women’s specific problems. “Most 
of them are based on abstinence, fidelity and use 
of condoms. These are not realistic options for 
women,” says Sally Smith of the Global Coalition 
on Women and AIDS, an initiative launched last 
February by UNAIDS. The result is that rumours 
and myths about how the virus is transmitted 
persist. In Cambodia and Vietnam, 50% of 
women between the ages of 15 and 24 believe 
that a mosquito bite can cause infection.
In that context, education remains the best 
antidote. Women who know how to read and 
write are three times more likely than illiterate 
women to know that a healthy-looking person can 
be carrying the virus, and four times more likely 
to know how to protect themselves from AIDS 
(UNAIDS, World Bank, 2002).
Science may also provide another part of the 
solution. For the last several years, scientists 
have been working on developing vaginal 
microbicides. In the form of gel, lubricant or 
suppositories, these products could give women 
more control of their sexuality, despite the fact 
that they are apparently only 60% effective. But 
funds are lacking. “Research in this area is cruelly 
underfinanced,” says Sally Smith. US $775 million 
are needed to test existing products, and only US 
$343 million have been allocated.
Such an investment, however, seems crucial. 
In its 2004 report “Changing History” the 
World Health Organization warns that women’s 
disproportionate mortality rate is leading to an 
imbalance in the adult population, with as-yet 
unforeseen consequences.    ■
Most prevention 
programmes
aimed at women 
recommend
abstinence, fidelity 
and using condoms
