Plant Pirates in Costa Rica
Several years ago Costa Rica began taking action to fi ght bio-piracy and 
to put to better use the richness of its fl ora, which is highly prized by the 
pharmaceutical industry.
Some of the Ngobe, indigenous people who live 
in Costa Rica and Panama, still remember how, 
in the 1990s, foreign doctors arrived among 
them – not to give them medical care, but to 
take samples of their blood and study their 
genes. A professor of environmental science at 
the University of Costa Rica, Silvia Rodriguez, 
says that during this period scientists collected 
DNA from indigenous communities in several 
countries, as part of a programme called 
“Human Genetic Diversity”, involving scien-
tists from America, Europe and Japan. Th is 
genetic information was supposed to explain 
the resistance or the vulnerability of these eth-
nic groups to certain diseases.  
Two doctors even attempted to patent cel-
lular information from a Ngobe woman in Pan-
ama without her knowledge, in order to study 
her supposed resistance to certain types of 
leukemia. In the face of opposition from indig-
enous organizations, environmental campaign-
ers and academics, the two American doctors, 
Jonathan E. Kaplan and Michael Dale Laimore, 
dropped their project.
But this use of genetic information from 
individuals without their clear consent is not 
the only type of bio-piracy. Costa Rica, which 
has a wealth of biodiversity, also has to defend 
itself against the illicit exploitation of its fl ora. 
Much is at stake: the plants are heavily used by 
the pharmaceutical industry. “Drugs made from 
plants generate business worth US$78 billion a 
year,” said the president of the Costa Rican fed-
eration for nature conservation, Isaac Rojas.
To ensure that the exploitation of its natural 
resources benefi ts the country itself, Costa Rica 
has created an almost unique institution: the 
National Institute of Biodiversity (Inbio). 
Founded as a private venture in 1989, Inbio has 
signed more than 30 agreements with local and 
foreign laboratories. It is currently working in 
partnership with the American biotechnology 
fi rm Diversa to develop new textile products 
using micro-organisms that are “made in Costa 
Rica”. Inbio has also allowed a Costa Rican lab-
oratory, Lisan, to develop drugs to treat diges-
tive and renal problems using the Quassia 
Amara bush, whose medicinal virtues have been 
familiar to Central American people for centu-
ries.
| Sharing profi ts
“Research and prospecting are expensive and 
we believe they should be undertaken in part-
nership with big companies who have the tech-
nology while we have the knowledge of 
biodiversity,” said Ana Lorena Guevara, one of 
Inbio’s directors.
But this approach does not satisfy everyone. 
Some environmental campaigners denounce 
what they see as “privatisation of biodiversity”. 
“We are at the mercy of a few laboratories. We 
don’t know how much they earn and how much 
they give back to us,” says Professor Rodriguez. 
Inbio defends itself against such accusations by 
stressing its compliance with a 1998 law on bio-
diversity.
At the request of countries from the south-
ern hemisphere, the Universal Declaration on 
Bioethics and Human Rights, adopted by 
UNESCO in autumn 2005, states that “scien-
tifi c research is only to be carried out with the 
prior, free, express and informed consent of the 
person concerned”. In future, the Ngobes will 
be able to turn to that article for protection. ◆
Juan Roman Rojas
