Cape Town: Garden Wonderland 
in the Midst of Urban Sprawl
 Instead of building fences around its unique fl oral heritage, Cape Town 
(South Africa) explores new ways to involve inhabitants in conservation
Despite their romantic names, Cape Town’s 
tough townships like Lavender Hill are not 
places many Capetonians are likely to venture. 
Yet, a few hundred metres away, down a sur-
prisingly quiet, tidy street, is the Rondevlei 
Nature Reserve. Once inside the gate, a haven 
of tranquil beauty opens up. A kingfi sher dives 
off  a tall reed; pelicans, spoonbills and pink fl a-
mingos mass on the banks of a vlei (lake), and, 
as night falls, a couple of hippos rise like sub-
marines to wallow and graze.
In Cape Town ‘urban’ and ‘natural’ worlds 
oft en coincide – or collide. Table Mountain, the 
heart of the city, is slap in the middle of busi-
ness and up-market residential areas. Yet it is 
home to Fynbos (pronounced fain-boss), a 
unique vegetation, and the main component of 
the Cape Floristic Kingdom – the world’s rich-
est, and geographically smallest, fl oral kingdom 
(plants confi ned to a geographical area). Some 
9,600 species can be found in an area the size of 
Portugal, 70% of them endemic (found nowhere 
else), while 1,406 are listed in the World Con-
servation Union’s (IUCN) Red Data book of 
endangered species. While the Cape floral 
region was inscribed on UNESCO’s World 
Natural Heritage List in 2004 for its unique 
fl ora and fauna, the region also has no less than 
two biosphere reserves – Kogelberg, just to the 
east of the city, and the West Coast Biosphere 
Reserve.
The proximity of this plant biodiversity 
‘hotspot’ to an urban area poses obvious con-
servation problems, especially given Cape 
Town’s open access policy to its national park 
– which means no fences and few pay points. 
The Cape’s townships 
adjoin the Rondevlei 
Nature Reserve

Conservation challenges are multiplied many 
times over by an explosion of economic 
migrants from the rural Eastern Cape in search 
of jobs, arriving at a rate of about 45,000 every 
three months. Under apartheid, black Africans 
were not allowed to live in central Cape Town 
and were confi ned to townships on the urban 
edge. Since the late 1980s, though, almost a mil-
lion (mostly Xhosa people) have settled on the 
city’s outskirts, many in the township of Khay-
elitsha. Th ese vast slums of tiny houses and tin 
shacks stretch as far as the eye can see, across 
the fragile dunes and seasonal wetlands of Cape 
Flats. 
| Involving communities
But the Cape Flats are also part of the Cape Flo-
ristic Kingdom. Yet, to the new arrivals, it looks 
like ‘scrubland’ - an ideal place to put up a 
makeshift  home. “How do you look aft er biodi-
versity in a context of extreme poverty, where 
local communities have little history of involve-
ment in conservation?” asks Tanya Goldman, 
Project Manager of Cape Flats Nature.
One response, she explains, is the City of 
Cape Town’s Integrated Metropolitan Environ-
ment Policy (IMEP), adopted in 2001, accord-
ing to which “there doesn’t have to be a choice 
between environment and people. You can pro-
tect the environment in a way that supports 
peoples’ needs.” At the heart of the IMEP is a 
Biodiversity Strategy, implemented through a 
network of 261 areas that should preserve a 
minimum of Cape Town’s unique biodiversity. 
For the moment, Cape Flats Nature is concen-
trating on four experimental sites.
One, the Edith Stephens Wetland Park, is a 
modest but promising start. “The City has 
started to get the message that they won’t fi nd 
support for conservation in the Cape Flats by 
fencing people out,” says Tanya Goldman. 
“Sustainable conservation management has to 
win the hearts, involvement and understanding 
of the surrounding communities.” Two of the 
other three pilot sites are more of a challenge, 
though. Both the Wolfgat Nature Reserve and 
Macassar Dunes are sensitive areas. Spectacu-
larly beautiful, and studded with arum lilies, 
they are also where gangsters dump their vic-
tims’ bodies. 
While Cape Flats Nature is working with 
traditional healers at Macassar Dunes to grow 
medicinal plants between the shacks and the 
dunes – to act as a buff er against further sprawl 
– Brett Myrdal, Manager of Table Mountain 
National Park, has a more controversial propo-
sition – housing. He wants to see “a middle 
class community from the townships overlook-
ing the coastal area.” But, he says, “Environ-
mentalists don’t see housing as part of a 
conservation solution. Th ey see it as a threat.” 
What if, in the end, both were right? ◆
P.C.
Facts and fi gures
 In 2005, 49% of the world’s population is living in urban areas. In 2030, that 
fi gure is likely to reach 60.8%. The proportion is higher in industrialized countries 
(74.9%) than it is in developing countries (43.2%). By 2030, those fi gures will 
have risen to 81.7% and 57% respectively. And by 2007, for the fi rst time in 
history, more than half the world’s population will be living in urban areas.
 In 2004, forests covered 29.6% of the world’s total land area. But between 1990 
and 2000, 9.4 million hectares of forest per year were lost to deforestation.
 In 2004, 2,791 species were listed as endangered, 1,490 of them plants and 
1,301 animals.
Sources: FAO, United Nations, World Conservation Union, World Bank
Env ironment
The Cape Floristic 
Kingdom is the richest 
in the world
