Last but not List
 The World Heritage List gets longer each year but is this to the 
detriment of the “exceptional universal value” attributed to the sites?
When certain sites are mentioned, some experts 
frown; in their eyes, these places do not merit 
the World Heritage label. True, the List has 
become infl ated over the past 30 years, a victim 
of its own success. Is it good or bad for the con-
cept of world heritage to expand as nomina-
tions multiply? “What we are defi nitely seeing 
is a shift  away from the original, exemplary list 
of symbolic sites,” says anthropologist Raphaël 
Souchier.  
Key to the debate is the notion of “excep-
tional universal value”, one of the criteria 
applied to the candidate sites. In the early days, 
many of the sites were synonymous with “won-
ders of the world”, and were not subject to con-
troversy. No one would consider questioning 
the universal appeal of the Pyramids at Giza 
(Egypt) or of the Galapagos Islands (Ecuador), 
but more recent additions have raised eye-
brows.
Comparing the city of Brasilia (1987) and 
the home of Luis Barragan in Mexico (2004), 
Christina Cameron, Research Chair on built 
heritage at the University of Montreal (Can-
ada), points out that the Brazilian capital was 
presented as “an exceptional global example of 
modern architecture and urban planning. As 
for the Barragan house, it was considered the 
modernist building having had the greatest 
infl uence on Latin America. Th ese are diff erent 
interpretations of exceptional universal value,” 
she says1. She estimates that in fact not more 
than 5% of the sites listed in the past fi ve years 
The city of Brasilia, 
inscribed in 1987, is an 
outstanding example 
of modern architecture

are “unquestionable”, in other words going 
beyond “cultural affi  liation” because they are 
“unique and recognized by all”, compared to 20 
to 30% of sites in the early years.
| Restricting nominations
Given that there is a waiting list of over 1,500 
sites, the process is not going to be reversed any 
time soon, although some measures have been 
taken to curb countries’ enthusiasm. Since 
2003, countries can only present one site per 
year and, since 2004, only one cultural and one 
natural site can be nominated per State Party. 
But the number of listings continues to grow. 
Th ere were 34 additions in 2004, compared 
with 31 in 2001 and 33 in 1993. 
A possible solution is to close the list once 
and for all, or to set a moratorium. But these 
measures would contradict another priority set 
by the Heritage Committee, to make the list 
more representative. Despite consistent eff orts 
to include more countries from the South by 
recognizing non-built sacred sites or cultural 
landscapes, Western aesthetic values continue 
to dominate the selection. Out of 812 sites, 410 
are located in Europe or North America. “Coun-
tries still prefer to list certain types of sites such 
as historic town centres. Who even knows that 
France has the fourth largest coral reef in the 
world in New Caledonia?” points out Mechtild 
Rössler, Chief of Europe and North America at 
the UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
The list is heavily loaded with religious 
monuments, mostly Christian, to the detriment 
of other categories such as examples of modern 
or industrial architecture. Th e 160 natural sites 
are also in the minority. In a report published 
in 2004, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) 
examined all the natural sites on the Heritage 
List. Th e results show that tropical savannahs, 
tundras, temperate prairies and cold-winter 
deserts are clearly under-represented. In this 
context, it would be diffi  cult to close the list in 
the near future.
More pragmatic experts are betting on a 
natural slowdown of nominations. “I am con-
vinced,” says Henry Cleere of ICOMOS, the 
International Council on Monuments and Sites, 
“that if the inscription criteria were rigorously 
respected, the list would reach a natural cut-off  
point of 1,200 within a decade.”  ◆
A.B
1. Paper for an Experts Meeting of the World Heritage Convention held in 
Kazan, Russian Federation, April 2005. 
The universal 
importance of sites 
such as the Pyramids 
of Giza is almost 
beyond question
www.unesco.org/en/courier/heritage 21
