Poverty can be measured not only in economic or social terms. In these 
times of globalization, the planet is now also divided between those who 
have mastered new information and communication technology (ICT) 
and those who have not. This “digital divide” is at the heart of the World 
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), held in Tunis on November 
16-18, 2005. 
Bridging the North South 
Divide © Drawings Christian Roux

Dig ital  Div ide
When it fi rst appeared, the internet seemed a 
most auspicious tool. It would enable the 
planet to become the “global village” envisaged by 
Marshall McLuhan. Th rough the Web, the poor 
countries would be able to benefi t, with unprec-
edented ease, from a myriad of databases, from 
training, from online courses, all of which would 
provide access to the knowledge society and allow 
these countries to catch up progressively with the 
pack of prosperous nations. In 2001, a United Na-
tions Development Programme (UNDP) report 
stated that technological networks are “transform-
ing the traditional map of development” and “cre-
ating the potential to realize in a decade progress 
that required generations in the past.”
Now that a few years have passed, this 
euphoria has somewhat subsided. Th e tool that 
provides immediate access to huge quantities of 
information remains as promising as ever, but 
there is now a greater awareness of the obsta-
cles to be overcome in order to provide access 
for all. In fact, the digital divide, the term 
applied to describe the technological gap 
between the North and the South, has widened. 
A few fi gures suffi  ce to prove this assertion: in 
the rich countries, one person out of three owns 
a computer compared to one out of 130 in 
Africa; in 2003, 19% of the planet represented 
91% of internet users; one third of the world’s 
population is not connected to an electricity 
supply.
| Information summit
It was in this morose context that the World 
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) was 
held in Geneva in December 2003, with a sec-
ond phase held in Tunis in November 2005. At 
the WSIS, sponsored by the International Tele-
communication Union (ITU), UNESCO, gov-
ernments, non-governmental organizations 
(NGO) and the private sector, participants all 
came to the same conclusion: the digital divide 
can be bridged if there is consensus on the 
means to bridge it. Th e Summit adopted a Dec-
laration of Principles and a 28-point Action 
Plan calling for universal access to information, 
cultural and linguistic diversity and the free 
exchange of ideas on the net. 
Taking concrete measures, the participants 
adopted the proposition of Senegalese Presi-
dent, Abdoulaye Wade, and, in March 2005, 
created a digital solidarity fund. Based in 
Geneva, it has already collected several hundred 
thousand euros. “Th e WSIS is an historic inter-
national discussion allowing the mobilization 
of numerous partners. Many of the principles 
upheld by UNESCO were included in the fi nal 
document,” says Elizabeth Longworth, Direc-
tor of UNESCO’s Information Society Division. 
Th e texts adopted in Geneva consolidated the 
idea of the “knowledge society, which encom-
passes more than just the information society 
because it also includes the issues of develop-
ment, of content and of diversity,” adds 
Axel Plathe of UNESCO’s Information Society 
Division. 
Th e distinction is important: a knowledge 
society is concerned not only with the trans-
mission of information but also with its content 
and use. Bridging the digital divide is not sim-
ply a question of providing equipment. “It’s 
hard to imagine that someone who doesn’t 
know how to read will know how to look things 
up in a library or that a person will become a 
mathematician simply because they have been 
off ered a digital television,” explains Eric Gui-
chard of the National Institute for Research in 
Computer Science and Control in an article 

entitled “Does the ‘Digital Divide’ Exist?” (1). 
Owning a computer is a fi rst step, but one “also 
requires a social capital in order to get help 
when  one  doesn ’ t  unders tand  the 
(dys)functioning of a soft ware programme, of 
an online service or of one’s computer; and, 
fi nally, one needs cultural capital to know where 
to look for the information one is seeking,” 
adds Guichard. UNESCO’s Information for All 
Programme (IFAP) was launched with these 
ideas in mind in order to develop “digital liter-
acy” in countries where access to the web is lim-
ited (see box on p. 61).
To achieve this “literacy,” however, lan-
guage-use on the web must be diversifi ed and 
improved. In 2003, 90% of internet users had 
access to only 11 languages (see chart above). 
English is the language most used by far (31.6%), 
followed by Chinese (13.2%) and Japanese 
(8.3%).  For Annie Chéneau-Loquay, founder 
of Afric’anti, an observatory studying the 
impact of ICT on West Africa, there is a need to 
develop content adapted to developing coun-
tries. “Beyond the transfer of technology issue, 
we must think about creating programmes that 
Other
Dutch
Portuguese
Italian
Korean
French
German
Spanish
Japanese
Chinese
English  31.6
13.2
8.3
6.4
5.9
4
3.4
3
3
1.6
19.5
(Percentages)
better respond to the specific needs of their 
economies and of their educational systems 
which oft en combine modern and traditional 
methods,” she says. 
But the battle may not yet be lost if the gen-
eral trend toward a regular increase in internet 
users is any indication, although this varies 
from one continent to another. There were 
23,000 internet users in Sub-Saharan Africa in 
1995, and there are nearly 9 million in 2005, 
according to the International Telecommuni-
cations Union. The number of mobile tele-
phones per inhabitant has also skyrocketed in 
the same region. According to Chéneau-
Loquay, “the acquisition of a cell phone in soci-
eties with a strong oral tradition is a positive 
sign, if not a defi nite indication.” ◆
Samy Mouhoubi
1. Article published in Globalization and Its New Divides: Malcontents, Recipes, 
and Reform, Dutch University Press, Amsterdam, 2003. 
Languages Used on the Internet
Source: Internet World Stats, 2005.
