
Natural Sites
Under Pressure
 The eff ects of climate change are already being observed on several 
World Heritage sites. Some environmentalists are calling for them to be 
placed on the endangered list.
From corals that are bleached due to a rise in 
water temperature, to glacier caps that are 
shrinking more and more each year, not to 
mention species that are becoming increasingly 
rare such as snow leopards, marine turtles or 
the manatee: the eff ects of global warming on 
the environment are now known. World Herit-
age sites, especially the natural ones, have obvi-
ously not been spared from this global 
phenomenon.
Some environmentalists have taken the next 
logical step and requested that certain sites be 
placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger. 
In November 2004, Pro Public (Friends of the 
Earth, Nepal) and the Climate Justice Pro-
gramme delivered several petitions to UNESCO 
requesting that the barrier reefs of Belize and 
Australia, the Huascaran National Park (Peru) 
that has the tallest tropical mountain range, and 
the Sagarmatha National Park (Nepal), over 
which looms Mount Everest, be included on the 
In Danger list. This is the first time climate 
change is invoked as a reason for such a move. 
“Th e Convention is an appropriate tool to cope 
with the degradation of the sites due to global 
warming,” says Peter Roderick, co-director of 
the Climate Justice Programme. “It is also a way 
to attract attention to the fact that these invalu-
able and exceptional sites are under threat,” he 
added. 
| Experts to study eff ects
Th e facts are undeniable. Th e snow cap of the 
Himalayas has shrunk by 30% in 30 years. In 
some areas, glacier lakes have formed and run 
the risk of one day fl ooding valley communi-
ties. Th e same is true of the mountains in the 
Huascaran National Park, which have lost 20% 
of their glacial cap since the end of the 1960s. 
As for the barrier reefs, they are threatened by 
rising water temperatures and the increase in 
CO2 concentrations in the ocean. “In the future, 
climate change could eclipse other threats 
weighing on heritage sites, especially in vulner-
able zones such as small coastal states, glaciers, 
coastal zones or coral reefs,” says David Shep-
pard, head of the Programme on Protected 
Areas for the World Conservation Union 
(IUNC). To remedy the situation he calls for 
the creation of buff er zones around the most 
threatened sites so that the ecosystems can be 
restored.
But the petitioners want to go even further. 
“We must not limit our eff orts only to the eff ects 
The snow cover on the 
Himalayas has been 
reduced by 30% in 
30 years

but also to the causes of the phenomenon,” says 
Peter Roderick, who is calling for the World 
Heritage Convention to be used as a means to 
pressure States Parties into reducing their 
greenhouse gas emissions. To support this 
demand he points to the article recognising the 
need for States Parties to “ensure the transmis-
sion of the cultural and natural heritage to 
future generations”. But this interpretation is 
erroneous, according to Francesco Bandarin, 
Director  of UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre. 
“Global warming is a global problem,” he 
explains, “but the Convention, which deals with 
individual sites, rests on a very local vision. 
Th ere is, therefore, a gap between the problem 
and the available tools.” And an ad hoc tool is 
already available, the United Nations Frame-
work Convention on Climate Change.
 Nonetheless, the idea is gaining ground. 
Due to the petitions, the question was added to 
the agenda of the World Heritage Committee 
meeting in July 2005 in Durban, South Africa. 
Although the Committee did not follow the 
environmentalists’ suggestion by putting the 
four sites on the In Danger list, it did call for a 
group of experts to be convened and to provide 
a report on the issue next year. ◆
A.B
