Predicting the Sea’s Anger
 Strengthened by its experience in the Pacifi c, the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission is encouraging the installation of an early 
warning system in the Indian Ocean.
On July 23, 2005, Tokyo (Japan) was hit by the 
most powerful earthquake to occur since 1992. 
Th is time, as it does every time there is a tremor, 
the computer of the Japanese Tsunami Warn-
ing Centre automatically informed the Japanese 
media. Meanwhile, seismologists were deter-
mining whether the earthquake detected could 
cause a tsunami, trying fi rst to locate its epicen-
tre and measure its intensity from information 
sent around the clock by the 200 seismic sta-
tions that monitor the country. If an earthquake 
is likely to provoke a tsunami, an evacuation 
order is sent out. Th is time it wasn’t necessary. 
Th e alert was canceled.
In all, these operations took less than fi ve 
minutes. “Combating tsunamis is a fi ght against 
time,” notes Masahiro Yamamoto, director of 
the Warning Centre. Th e interval between an 
earthquake and its warning signal has been 
divided by fi ve since the 1970s.  Th at is still not 
fast enough, however, for tsunamis as rapid as 
the one in Hokkaido in 1993 whose 30-foot 
wave swept over the town three minutes aft er 
the quake.
According to experts, if such a system had 
existed in the countries aff ected by the tsunami 
that hit Asia in December 2004, numerous lives 
could have been spared. Which is why 
UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC) is pushing for the installa-
tion of a Tsunami Warning System in the Indian 
Ocean.
| Installing an alert system
In the meantime, a temporary alert system has 
been put into place in the region. Th e Pacifi c and 
Japanese Tsunami Warning Centres communi-
cate information about tsunamis to the 25 Mem-
ber States. Warning time will be 
reduced thanks to 23 real-time 
sea-level stations, modernized by 
the IOC. Right now it takes one 
hour, which would have been fast 
enough for Sri Lanka, hit two 
hours aft er the earthquake, but not 
for Indonesia.
Each country is working out 
ways to alert its population: 
sirens, bulletins to the media, 
mobile phone text messages, 
police patrols or even using the 
minarets in Malaysia and Indo-
nesia. Th e system should be fully 
operational by 2007, but there is 
still much to do.  Even though 
Th ailand has started evacuation 
drills in tourist resorts, the task of 
informing the population remains 
a challenge. Evaluation of the 
exposed areas is also necessary, in 
order to make appropriate evacu-
ation plans and organize coastal 
zones. After the Indian Ocean, the IOC has 
decided to install the same type of system for 
the Caribbean, North-east Atlantic and Medi-
terranean seas.     ◆
M.E
The town of Banda 
Aceh (Indonesia) the 
day after the tsunami
