Cultural  diversit y
In the course of impassioned debates, the Convention on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions was adopted 
during the 33rd session of UNESCO’s General Conference. Its purpose: 
to protect goods and services that are vehicles of identity, values and 
meaning. Back in 2001, the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity 
had already raised cultural diversity to the level of “common heritage 
of humanity”. But this time the Convention, a binding legal instrument, 
commits the States that sign it.
A Burst of Creativity
Books, like fi lms and 
records, are vehicles of 
identity and meaning
© UNESCO/Dominique Roger

Cultural  diversit y
May 2005, a meeting is convened in St Petersburg 
(Russian Federation) to prepare the World 
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). Sep-
tember 2005, academic exchanges are organized 
in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso). October 2005, a 
large advertising company sponsors a photography 
prize. What do these events have in common? All 
of them, in diff erent ways, claim to relate to cul-
tural diversity.
Th is not a new idea. Th e “fruitful diversity of 
cultures” is already mentioned in the 1945 
UNESCO Constitution. But it has taken on par-
ticular prominence since globalization came 
along. Given that now all cultures are able to 
mingle (about 175 million people live outside of 
their countries of origin, and one person out of 
ten living in the industrialized countries is an 
immigrant, according to the United Nations’ 
2002 International Migration Report), we need 
to remember that all forms of expression, value 
systems, traditions and beliefs are unique, frag-
ile and irreplaceable. Th eir fragility is best illus-
trated when we look at languages. Out of 6,000 
known languages, nearly 50% are estimated to 
be threatened with extinction. On the internet, 
90% of languages are not represented. Right 
there, many cultures are threatened. In bridg-
ing the digital divide, defending copyright, col-
lecting data on local and indigenous knowledge 
or safeguarding tangible and intangible herit-
age, UNESCO has been actively promoting cul-
tural diversity since its creation.
| Ethical imperative
“Cultural diversity has become pivotal to the 
future of societies and requires renewed action,” 
declared Director-General Koichiro Matsuura 
on May 21, 2005 (1). Th e unanimous adoption in 
November 2001 of the Universal Declaration on 
Cultural Diversity demonstrates how important 
the issue has become to the international com-
munity. For the fi rst time, it created a normative 
instrument that raises cultural diversity to the 
rank of “common heritage of humanity… as 
necessary for humankind as biodiversity is for 
nature”, and makes its safeguarding an ethical 
imperative indispensable to respect  human dig-
nity. A year later, at the Johannesburg World 
Summit on Sustainable Development in Septem-
ber 2002, a Declaration was adopted that recog-
nizes cultural diversity as a collective force that 
must be promoted to ensure sustainable devel-
opment (para. 16). But a decisive step was taken 
when the 33rd session of the UNESCO General 
Conference adopted in October 2005 the Inter-
national Convention on the Protection and Pro-
motion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 
“considered to have been greatly undermined by 
current processes and not as yet enjoying any 
particular protection” (2). Th is time, unlike the 
Declaration, the Convention is a binding legal 
instrument and represents a commitment by the 
States that ratify it.
Its adoption was not a foregone conclusion. 
Th ree aspects were particularly controversial. 
Th e fi rst has to do with defi nitions, notably of 
cultural goods and services: should they be con-
sidered products like any other goods? Finally, 
in the preamble,  they are defi ned as having 
“both an economic and a cultural nature… ” 
and “must therefore not be treated as solely 
having commercial value”. And the aim of the 
Convention, expressed in Article I, is “to give 
recognition to the distinctive nature of cultural 
activities, goods and services as vehicles of 
identity, values and meaning”. Simply put, that 
means that fi lms, CDs, or books are not only 
subject to the rules of the marketplace, but, as 
vehicles for identity, values and meaning, they 
may benefi t from protection, i.e. preservation, 
safeguarding or promotion, as specifi ed in the 
definitions. The second article affirms that 
States Parties may formulate cultural policies to 
support creativity. Th ey may, for instance, sub-
sidize arts and culture, or grant tax reductions 
to encourage and protect their national cul-
tures, taking into consideration human rights 
and the free fl ow of information. Finally, the 
third point concerns Article 20, which indicates 
that the Convention will not confl ict with other 
treaties, but will work on the principle of 
“mutual supportiveness, complementarity and 
nonsubordination”. Less ardently discussed, 
the point concerning international cultural 
cooperation (Articles 12 to 19) sets out the con-
ditions for a new form of solidarity that places 
culture at the heart of development.
Finally, at the close of the passionate debates, 
the Convention was adopted. It will go into 
eff ect as soon as it has 30 States Parties. ◆
1. Message of the Director-General of UNESCO on the occasion of the World 
Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development, 21 May 2005 
2. Ibid
