Clemens Hüttner is no ordinary trader. Since April 
this year, he has been trading on a brand-new kind 
of commodity market. He is not dealing in coff ee 
or minerals, though, but industrial emissions of 
carbon dioxide, one of the so-called greenhouse 
gases thought to be contributing to a global rise in 
temperature since the industrial era began. 
Under the Kyoto Protocol, which came into 
force on February 16 this year, 38 industrialised 
countries, of the total 55 signatories, committed 
themselves to reduce by 2012 their combined 
emissions of greenhouse gases to at least 5 percent 
below the levels they were emitting in 1990. Th e 
European Union, as a whole, has committed itself 
to do even better, reducing its overall emissions by 
8% below 1990 levels. 
To reach these goals, each of the 38 countries 
has set target emissions for their polluting indus-
tries. At the end of the year, industries that come 
under target will get “carbon credits” – a sort of 
pollution allowance – while those that come out 
over the limit will either have to pay a fi ne – around 
40 euros for each tonne of CO2 over limit – or will 
have to buy credits from cleaner industries. Several 
“carbon exchanges” already exist, the largest being 
the International Petroleum Exchange in London, 
where Clemens Hüttner trades. Only European 
industries are trading until 2008, when the global 
emission market opens.
So far, says Hüttner, who trades on behalf of a 
major cement producer, Heidelberg Cement, the 
market has mostly attracted fi nance houses and 
banks, speculating on future rises in the value of 
carbon credits. “When I started to do this job in 
early April the price was something like 12 or 
13 euros per tonne. Within three months it has 
become 25 euros. So you can easily make a huge 
amount of money,” he says.  But this was not the 
aim. “Th e scheme was designed to reduce the emis-
sions of industrials and utilities,” he explains.
Under the Kyoto Protocol, industries can also 
gain emissions credits by “greening” industries in 
developing countries. At their plant in Indonesia, 
explains Hüttner, Heidelberg Cement is replacing 
coal with biomass. “We have a project using coco-
nut shells, or palm oil kernels or palm oil, which is 
pure biomass and has a very high heating value. 
Th en we invest heavily in the energy effi  ciency of 
the plant in general,” he says. 
Th e scheme also allows countries or industries 
to gain carbon credits by investing in reforesta-
tion – the trees act as “sinks” for carbon dioxide. 
But, says Natarajan Ishwaran, Director of 
UNESCO’s Division of Ecological and Earth Sci-
ences, environmentalists are sceptical of the 
scheme, not least because, he says, “Th e error is 
too high in calculating how much carbon dioxide 
forests, coral reefs and the oceans absorb.” Th is 
makes it hard to put a value on the credits that 
industries should earn through planting trees. 
Meanwhile, critics fear that it will lead to further 
degradation of the environment if fast-growing, 
non-indigenous trees are planted in monoculture 
plantations just to gain credits.  ◆
P.C.
Cloud of pollution 
above India and 
Bangladesh
