Cultural  diversit y
“ Cultural Diversity can neither be 
decreed nor improvised”
 For the fi rst time in 2001, UNESCO recognized cultural diversity as 
the “common heritage of humanity”.
Th e UNESCO Constitution mandates the Organ-
ization both to respect the “fruitful diversity of 
(...) cultures” and to “promote the free fl ow of 
ideas by word and image”. Since the Constitution 
was adopted, UNESCO has spared no eff ort to 
fulfi l this double mission. Its progression between 
1946 and 2005 is easily followed. 
Diversity remains the central issue, but it has 
been a long road in a rapidly changing world from 
recognizing the diversity between cultures, to 
affi  rming that they are of equal dignity, then to 
recognizing cultural diversity in itself and, fi nally, 
the diversity of cultural expressions. In fact, cul-
tural diversity can neither be decreed nor impro-
vised. It constantly raises new challenges and calls 
for new forms of action.
The UNESCO Universal Declaration on 
 Cultural Diversity (2001), for the fi rst time, recog-
nized cultural diversity as “the common heritage 
of humanity”; its defence is considered as an 
We have come a long 
way from the equal 
dignity of cultures 
to the diversity of 
cultural expressions

 ethical and concrete imperative that cannot be 
dissociated from respect for the dignity of the 
individual.
| A relative notion
Because of its sweeping force, the Declaration 
gave rise to wide debate: oft en used as a slogan, 
cultural diversity remains a relative notion. Th is 
explains that various, and oft en divergent, defi -
nitions can be proposed in economic circles, 
the academic community, the world of politics, 
and by culture professionals or civil society. Th e 
Declaration did not end the recurring debate 
on the role of the State in determining cultural 
policies: some believe that culture belongs to 
the private sector and, as a consequence, reject 
all intervention in this fi eld. Others believe that 
a democratic state must be the guarantor of a 
national and international environment favour-
able to the blossoming of local and global cul-
tural diversity. Finally, the developing countries, 
oft en expressing themselves through the Group 
of 77 (today 130 countries including China), 
refuse to be the providers of global cultural 
diversity while being denied access to the sym-
bolic and economic benefi ts derived from it.
In this context, in which a series of new ques-
tions were raised, particularly because of the accel-
eration of globalization, discussions were opened 
in 2003 to draft  a Convention on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expres-
sions, to be examined by the 33d session of the 
General Conference in October. Th is new stand-
ard setting instrument is linked to precise aspects 
of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity 
as stipulated in Articles 8 through 11. Th at is, the 
need to recognize that cultural goods and services 
have an identity, values and meaning and cannot 
be considered in the same manner as manufac-
tured or consumer goods; the need for States to 
take all measures necessary to protect and pro-
mote diversity of cultural expression while ensur-
ing the free fl ow of ideas and works; and fi nally the 
need to redefi ne international cooperation, the 
keystone of the Convention. 
By draft ing a Convention within UNESCO, 
the Member States intend to contribute to the rec-
ognition of creative diversity, the driving force of 
development, of international solidarity, and of 
mutual comprehension. A wide availability of this 
creative diversity, whether emanating from inte-
rior or exterior sources, off ers cultural and social 
advantages far beyond its strictly commercial 
dimension.  Particular care was taken to avoid 
certain pitfalls: a polarized debate between the “all 
cultural” and the “all commercial”; cultural rela-
tivism that, in the name of cultural diversity, rec-
ognizes cultural practices contrary to the basic 
principles of human rights; and a narrow concep-
tion of culture as simply entertainment and not as 
a source of identity and dignity for individuals 
and societies. 
| Diversity and development
Th is shows that the Draft  Convention was con-
ceived as a means to link “culture and develop-
ment”, the latter term being understood in both 
its tangible and symbolic sense: economic growth 
combined with the fulfi lment of human beings 
enjoying their basic rights, open to the world 
without losing their bearings. It is also a sign 
that the Convention was conceived as a means to 
link “culture and international solidarity”, by 
favouring exchanges and partnerships that are 
particularly benefi cial to countries whose cul-
tural expression has been damaged. Finally, it is 
a sign that the Convention was conceived as a 
means of tightening the ties between “culture 
and mutual comprehension”: each type of crea-
tion carries the seeds of the discovery of oneself 
and of others. In this, it is part of the mysterious 
alchemy of interaction and releases the tremen-
dous energy of cultural diversity, which does not 
consist of a fi xed inventory of variations or vari-
ables but which carries the hope, forever 
renewed, of a more human future.
We all contribute to and we all benefi t from 
cultural diversity, and we are therefore all respon-
sible for safeguarding it. ◆
Katerina Stenou
Director of the Division of Cultural Policies and 
Intercultural Dialogue 
