Many of us do not realize to what extent copyrights 
are a part of daily life. When we read a book, 
watch a fi lm or listen to the radio, use a computer 
or go to the theatre, we are consuming goods pro-
tected by copyright. At this very moment, you can 
read this magazine or look at its photos by browsing 
on internet. Th is is possible thanks to international 
legislation that established authors’ and artists’ right 
to compensation for the use of their work, allowing 
them to continue working and to publicize their 
creations.
UNESCO is already 60 years old, but inter-
national copyright protection is much older. 
The first international document on the sub-
ject, the Bern Convention for the Protection of 
Literary and Artistic Works, today imple-
mented by the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), was signed on Septem-
ber 9, 1886. Even further back, in the 18th cen-
tury, Diderot was already advocating for 
remuneration for artistic endeavour. In earlier 
times, artists offered their talent to the court, 
Writers, musicians, photographers, painters, computer programmers, 
translators….Without copyrights, none of these occupations could claim 
remuneration. But because culture must be accessible to the greatest 
number, UNESCO is engaged in seeking the right balance between the 
interests of the artist and those of the general public. New techniques of 
pirating musical recordings or DVDs, however, are threatening this fragile 
equilibrium. Not only the rich countries have to pay the cost.
Seeking the Right Balance
Copy r ight
© Drawings Christian Roux

the church or the local grandee who financed 
their activities. In return the patron appeared 
in the painting or had a book dedicated to him, 
in the manner of the Duke of Bejar for “Don 
Quixote”.
In the 20th century, copyright gained in 
importance to the point of being mentioned in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Th e second paragraph of Article 27 stipulates 
that “everyone has the right to the protection of 
the moral and material interests resulting from 
any scientifi c, literary or artistic production of 
which he is the author.” Th e fi rst paragraph of 
the same Article stipulates that “everyone has 
the right freely to participate in the cultural life 
of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share 
in scientifi c advancement and its benefi ts,” an 
argument used in favour of freer, and some-
times simply free, access to cultural goods.
| Pirate market
“There is no contradiction,” explains Petya 
Totcharova, expert from UNESCO’s Division 
of Arts and Cultural Enterprise, “since the idea 
is to fi nd just the right balance between the 
rights of the author and public interests.” 
Totcharova notes that “copyright does not 
override all other considerations because, when 
a higher public interest is at stake – education, 
scientific advancement etc.— international 
treaties such as the Universal Copyright Con-
vention, of which UNESCO is depository, pro-
vides for exceptions to the rule.” Being allowed 
to quote a few lines from an author without 
paying him royalties is one example.
Th is is not pirating, which is usually moti-
vated by greed. “Most people are unaware that 
some of the most sophisticated forms of organ-
ized crime are involved in pirating because it 
generates easy money, and because it is more 
acceptable and punished less harshly than drug 
or arms traffi  cking,” says Darrell Panethiere, a 
London lawyer who represents several private 
companies. Also, contrary to popular belief, 
victims are not only big London recording 
companies or Hollywood fi lm production com-
panies but also cultural industries in develop-
ing countries. “Many Latin American singers 
record in Miami, and those from French-speak-
ing Africa in Paris,” explains Panethiere, the 
author of a recently published report on the 
subject. “Th eir music is then sold worldwide 
and this money allows them to go on tour, to 
become known, to be paid royalties...If pirating 
were more tightly controlled, local labels could 
also make these recordings”.  
Mexico is a case in point. Th e culture indus-
try, with over one million works copyrighted, 
generates approximately 6% of Mexico’s gross 
domestic product, and the country was listed 
for years among the world’s top ten music pro-
ducers. Today the pirate market sells 76 million 
records a year in over 50,000 sales outlets, out-
Copy r ight
The Indian fi lm 
industry is the one 
that produces the 
most fi lms 

weighing the legal market that can only sell 56 
million.  “We are studying the possibilities of 
legal reforms to increase the sanctions, because 
besides the loss of investment and jobs in the 
country, pirating is hurting our exports, which 
were signifi cant in the region and in the United 
States,” says Victor Manuel Guizar Lopez, 
Director of the Copyright Violations Protection 
Department of Mexico’s National Copyright 
Institute (INDAUTOR).
  Same story in India, which boasts the world’s 
most prolific film industry. With 1,100 films 
produced in 2003, it far outstrips Hollywood’s 
output. According to data provided by the Con-
federation of Indian Industry (CII), India’s fi lm 
industry loses US$ 70 million per year to pirat-
ing, mostly because of illegal sales abroad. It is 
estimated that four out of ten Bollywood-pro-
duced CDs and DVDs sold in the United King-
dom are counterfeit copies. These figures are 
even higher in Bangladesh or Sri Lanka— not 
counting fi lms broadcast on cable television net-
works that don’t pay royalties. And as music is a 
major ingredient of any self-respecting Bolly-
wood drama, the musical rights can represent up 
to 15% of profi ts—or losses—on certain fi lms.
Counterfeiting cuts into profi ts and jobs in 
other places besides India. In Gabon, fi lm thea-
tres have all but disappeared. In certain coun-
tries, 90% of available recordings are pirated. 
But the most serious ills are sometimes the least 
visible. “Recorded music represents the musical 
life of a society at a given point in time. If the 
best musicians of a nation are not commercially 
recorded, their works will not be preserved and 
the losses that represents to local culture are 
incalculable because, with them, an essential 
element of the country’s historical memory dis-
appears,” says Darrell Panethiere. If this dooms-
day prophecy, which holds for literature as well 
as cinema, were realized, where would one have 
to go to fi nd the “right balance”? ◆
Lucia Iglesias Kuntz
