It was early afternoon on May 22, 1960, 
in the thriving port of Corral, southern 
Chile, when disaster struck. The town’s 
inhabitants were at first startled to see the sea 
rising and then disappearing: the water simply 
withdrew, leaving boats marooned on the mud 
of the sea floor. Just a few minutes later, the 
terrified inhabitants began to witness the return 
of the water, but this time in the shape of a 
gigantic wall that was decimating everything in 
its path. Thousands of people died that day on 
the shores of southern Chile and in lands as far 
away as Hawaii or Japan, for the giant wave (or 
“tsunami,” as the Japanese call it) travelled the 
entire Pacific Ocean, coast to coast.
That tragedy taught Chile a tough lesson, 
which bore fruit six years later via the 
creation of the Sistema Nacional de Alarma de 
Maremotos, or National Tidal Wave Warning 
System (SNAM). At the same time, UNESCO’s 
Chiloe Island (Chile) 
the day after the May 
22, 1960, tsunamiThe giant waves that 



devastated the Indian 
Ocean’s coastline clearly 
demonstrated the need 
to create at the global 
level a tsunami warning 
system similar to the one 
UNESCO established in 
1968 in the Pacific Ocean. 
CHILE: 
THE LESSONS OF 
A TRAGEDY

Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) was finalizing The International Pacific 
Tsunami Warning System, which now allows for 
direct communication with 26 separate member-
states, enabling warnings to be sent and received 
whenever emergencies arise in any part of the 
ocean.
In Chile, both of these tasks now fall to the 
Navy’s Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service 
(SHOA), based in Valparaíso, which employs 
advanced technology alongside a warning 
management system and public awareness-raising 
to ensure that the disaster of 1960 will never be 
repeated.
THREE REGIONAL CENTRES
Commander Roberto Garnham, director of the 
SHOA, explains that this system is working very 
effectively in the Pacific Ocean, and that much 
has been learnt from previous tragedies along 
the coastlines of both South America and Asia. 
The system, which relies on antennae stationed 
in every one of the member countries, is based 
around three regional centres - one in Hawaii, one 
in Alaska and a third in Chile – which together 
monitor and supervise events across the whole 
Pacific Ocean. In the case of Chile, this is carried 
out by a network of digital devices placed along 
the coast of Chile and its nearby islands, which 
keep tabs on abnormal variations in the sea level 
and in seismic activity. The system is triggered 
whenever a seismic event leads to a tsunami 
warning within the national territory, or whenever 
the Valparaiso centre receives a memo or a 
warning from the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre.
When a warning is issued, the SHOA passed 
on the alert to a public agency called Onemi (the 
National Emergency Office), which immediately 

Buoy in Chile, a 
component of the 
Pacific Tsunami 
Warning System
activates the network that has been set up to 
organize contingency plans through direct radio 
contact with regional governments, which in 
turn relay information directly to provincial and 
community authorities. This network means that 
the whole country can be warned of a possible 
approaching tidal wave within five minutes or 
less.
Commander Garnham notes that the best 
way of knowing if an earthquake will produce a 
tsunami is the strength of the tremor: whether it is 
weak enough to allow someone to stay standing, 
or strong enough to force people on the ground 
to lose their balance. “If this happens, the best 
recommendation I can give is that people who live 
in the coastal zone should take a torch, batteries 
and a radio, and head for higher ground, which 
must be over 25 metres above sea level,” he says. 
Once the first alert is given, if the SHOA confirms 
that a tsunami wave has been produced, then the 
news is conveyed once again to Onemi, which can 
then determine the estimated time of arrival of the 
water for different parts of the country.
From that moment on, each affected community 
must put into practice its evacuation and civil 
defence plans. As part of these plans, the 
country’s 28 main ports have maps showing 
the areas that will be flooded in the event of 
a tsunami. Two of them, the northern cities of 
Arica and Antofagasta, have also set up helpful 
signposts, and keep their local populations 
regularly informed of emergency plans.
GLOBAL COOPERATION 
IS VITAL
While many districts have yet to put enough 
work into preparing their communities for a 
possible tsunami, the SHOA and Onemi continue 
to produce information and educational material. 
Above all else, these organizations stress that 
with sound evacuation plans and a well-informed 
and prepared population, over 90 percent of the 
members of any locality can be saved in the space 
of 10 to 15 minutes.
“The benefits of a tsunami warning 
system are so great that UNESCO, through its 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, 
is intent on establishing a worldwide warning 
system. And we are ready to contribute our 
experience and our knowledge if they are 
needed,” declares Garnham, adding that the 
centre he heads operates 24 hours a day, 365 days 
a year.
Garnham observes that knowing which areas 
can be flooded can affect the value of land and 
tourist sites, as well as the possibilities for general 
development, but emphasizes that a much 
greater good is being served. “The world must 
acknowledge that certain events are adverse, 
and that they must be prepared for as Chile has 
already done. This country now has buildings 
made to resist earthquakes and flooding maps, 
which enable plans to be drawn up to protect 
local populations,” he concludes.
Emilio Lorca, head of SHOA’s geophysics 
department, warns for his part that it is not 
enough for one country to have a warning centre 
if this is not connected with others. “The system 
works precisely because it is interconnected with 
other locations that exchange information. If not, 
this would be useless,” he states.
Organizing a system such as the one across 
the Pacific Ocean is, of course, far from easy. 
Provisional estimates suggests that a similar 
emergency network in the Indian Ocean would 
need around $30 million, well-trained staff, a 
tailor-made communication system and a lot of 
time. “A system such as this can raise awareness 
of the risk of a tsunami, and that is very positive, 
because it helps countries to organize themselves 
and work in cooperation,” insists Lorca. 
According to this expert, the number of fatalities 
caused by the tsunami in South Asia would have 
been much lower if the region had benefited from 
a system like that operating across the Pacific.
Marcia Franque 
journalist from the daily “El Mercurio”, 
Valparaiso (Chile)
www.unesco.org/tsunami
