 “Do jeans grow on trees?” The question is 
ludicrous, but that is the point, to fire the 
children’s imagination and make them think 
about their clothes: what they are made of, where 
they come from and where they end up... From 
there, the children are encouraged to think up 
stories inspired by the process that produced their 
sports shoes or their jacket. 
The idea for this kind of role-playing is included 
in an educational pack distributed by the German 
Commission for UNESCO to almost 300 schools 
that belong to the Associated Schools Project 
▲
Report planned and prepared by Agnès Bardon
At a Beijing (China) 
dump, recyclable 
materials are 
salvaged for resale
PROJECTING THE PLANET INTO THE FUTURE
Network (ASPnet), ranging from pre-school to 
secondary establishments. The aim is to raise 
awareness among young people about sustainable 
development, starting by taking a look at their daily 
lives. The approach is original because sustainable 
development has failed to find a place in most 
school curricula.
Yet since sustainable development first emerged in 
1987, the idea has made headway, as demonstrated 
by the current popularity of fair trade, organic food 
and ethical investments. Even more significantly, 
the 2004 Nobel Prize was awarded to the militant 
Kenyan ecologist Wangari Maathi “for her 
contribution to sustainable development”.
FOCUSED ON HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
Intended to meet “the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs”, according to the definition 
of the United Nations Commission chaired in 1987 
by Gro Harlem Brundtland, sustainable development 
requires that the environment be taken into 
consideration when shaping development policy. 
It encompasses economic and social dimensions, 
as was stated during the Johannesburg Summit in 
2002, as well as cultural aspects (see box p. 30). 
Furthermore, the prevention of natural catastrophes, 
the fight against HIV/AIDS, water management and 
even reducing poverty are all linked to the concept 
of sustainable development.
“Unlike education about the environment, 
which is focused on preserving natural resources, 
sustainable development is centred on man,” 
says Claude Villeneuve, director of the eco-
consultancy chair at the University of Quebec 
at Chicoutimi (Canada). And it is humankind, 
being asked to change its behaviour, that is at the 
heart of the Decade of Education for Sustainable 
Development (2005-2014). UNESCO was among 

the first organizations to undertake an examination 
of the relationship between humans and their 
environment, with the launch in 1972 of the Man 
and the Biosphere (MAB) programme.
It is a mammoth task. The destruction of 
ecosystems and the rapid consumption of natural 
resources threaten human wellbeing in the medium-
term future. For example, the amount of water 
available per capita has decreased from 12,900 m3 
in 1970 to less than 7,000 m3 today and is expected 
to fall to 5,100 m3 by 2025. Another worrying 
statistic is that 17 of the world’s biggest fishing 
zones have reached or exceeded their natural limits, 
according to the Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO). And it is primarily the developing countries 
which pay the price; poor people in rural areas 
“tend to be more directly dependent” on services 
from ecosystems according to the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment report (see Box p. xx).
But merely knowing that the planet is under 
threat is not enough to change people’s attitudes on 
a daily basis. The knowledge has to be taken into 
consideration. “Research on the habits of consumers 
tells us that the correlation between awareness and 
action is low. Most people agree with the idea that 
we should all save energy, but most people don’t do 
it,” says Clayton White who teaches education for 
sustainable development at the Peace University in 
Costa Rica. Studies in industrialised countries show 
that only 5% of consumers have adopted a lifestyle 
compatible with sustainable development.
FROM WORDS TO ACTION
Pleas for consumers to adopt a more responsible 
attitude seem to fall on deaf ears. “The messages 
from governments exhorting people to use their cars 
less or to avoid buying products which cause severe 
damage to the environment do not work. You will 
only have limited success by making people feel 
guilty about their lifestyle and their buying habits,” 
Klaus Toepfer, the director of the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), said in 2003.
In this context, education has a key role to play. 
But sustainable development, because it concerns 
our production methods as much as our transport, 
food or construction, cannot be taught as if it were a 
subject like biology or algebra.
“It is less about a prescribed body of knowledge 
and more about concrete exploration of issues. 
Education for sustainable development needs to 
▲

be related to the learner’s needs and to engage 
with ‘real world’ issues,” says Stephen Sterling, 
an independent British consultant on education 
related to environmental issues and sustainable 
development. “It is important to ‘start from where 
the people are at’ in order to establish the issue’s 
personal relevance. Then we can help people expand 
their perspective.”
The aim therefore is not to create an abstract 
concept but rather to cultivate a form of good 
citizenship applied to our everyday behaviour. 
Anyone can do this, for example by opting for 
seasonal produce. A strawberry imported by plane 
and purchased in France in March consumes 24 
times more energy than the same fruit bought in 
June and grown locally. When you find out that 
the annual consumption of paper in offices is 75 
kilograms per person, in other words the equivalent 
of one tree, it can also help encourage people to be 
less wasteful.
▼Tuna fishermen 
in Abidjan (Cote 
d’Ivoire). Seventeen 
of the world’s largest 
fishing zones have 
reached their natural 
limits

So instead of giving a theoretical lesson on 
recycling waste, Claude Villeneuve encouraged his 
students at the University of Quebec at Chicoutimi 
study concretely the way the university managed 
its own waste. The first thing to note was that the 
university only recycled paper and there was so 
much waste that a garbage truck had to come every 
day at an annual cost of 45,000 dollars. “So starting 
from that basis, we found companies who recycle 
old computers, plastic and metal and we called 
in a company that deals with organic waste and 
comes to collect it for free,” Villeneuve explains. 
Recyclable material such as wood is now processed 
by companies that employ staff from socially 
disadvantaged backgrounds. The result is that the 
amount of waste has been greatly reduced and the 
cost of processing it has been cut by 80 percent. 
Everyone comes out ahead.
“Sustainable development begins at home. You 
have to realize that everything you do counts,” 
stresses Villeneuve. It is then up to society’s other 
actors to follow through. “Changing attitudes is 
important and education can help,” says Clayton 
White, “but we must also work to create the social, 
economic and political institutions that will make 
sustainable development a reality.” 
Agnès Bardon
Like the black caiman, 
between 20% and 
30% of animal species 
are threatened with 
extinction
