Seoul, February 2004. Professor Hwang Woo-suk 
has just cloned a human embryo for the fi rst 
time. Th e aim is not to obtain a genetically per-
fect baby, but rather embryonic stem cells, which 
could eventually treat diseases that are incurable 
at present. Unlike many countries, the Republic of 
Korea allows therapeutic cloning.
As the fi rst scientist to successfully carry out 
such a feat, Hwang Woo-suk had something to 
celebrate. But his overriding concern was to 
discuss the meaning of this discovery with the 
Archbishop of Seoul, Nicholas Cheong Jin-suk. 
Th e two men met on June 15, 2005. For an hour, 
the professor and the man of the church spoke 
of the beginning of life, respect for human dig-
nity and human rights, the status of the embryo, 
the powers of science and the duties of con-
science... in a word, bioethics.
Cloning, using genetic data, pre-implantation diagnosis, research on 
embryonic stem cells... All these scientifi c advances are a double-edged 
sword: promising for patients and problematic from an ethical point of 
view. In order to guide states in considering the issues, UNESCO has for 
many years played the role of ethical watchdog. After texts on the human 
genome (1997) and on human genetic data (2003), the Organization has 
just adopted the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights.
Giving Science
a Conscience
Bioethics
© Drawings Christian Roux


Faced with the speed of scientifi c progress, 
governments from now on must give their ver-
dict on these issues, as well as on medically 
assisted procreation or the 
choice of a child’s gender 
before birth. Some have already 
established legal mechanisms, 
while others have not.
In line with its mandate as 
an ethical watchdog, UNESCO 
took an early interest in the 
progress of scientifi c research. 
Th e Organization has already 
adopted two declarations, in 
1997 and 2003, to respond 
specifically to the problems 
posed by biology and genetics 
(see box below). The third 
phase of this consultation 
process is the Universal Decla-
ration on Bioethics and Human Rights, and its 
adoption by UNESCO’s General Conference in 
autumn 2005. Th is text is designed as a “global 
response to the ethical implications” arising 
from “rapid developments in science and 
 technology”.
In reality, the Declaration 
gives no defi nitive response to 
the questions raised by thera-
peutic cloning or stem cell 
research. Its role is more to 
nurture a wider debate. “Th e 
status of the embryo, euthana-
sia and abortion are not 
included in it because they are 
too controversial,” UNESCO’s 
Director of Ethics, Henk ten 
Have, explains.
The willingness to find a 
consensus between Member 
States on this diffi  cult subject 
has been paramount at each 
stage of the draft ing process. 
For example, some States are upset that the 
Declaration makes no mention of the “right to 
life”. It is the most sensitive question of all: does 
life begin at birth? Or at conception? Or at the 
fetal stage? Th e experts eventually decided to 
talk about “respect for the life of human beings”. 
It is up to each State to decide what is meant by 
“human being”.
| Social function of science
However, at the initiative of developing coun-
tries, the scope of the Declaration has been wid-
ened to include social and environmental issues. 
Th e text says that progress in science and tech-
nology should make it easier for the destitute to 
have access to proper care, medicine, food and 
water. Additionally, some Latin American 
countries have insisted that the Declaration 
includes a mention of the “illicit trade” in 
“genetic resources”, an allusion to bio-piracy, 
the exploitation of natural resources by private 
companies without the profits being fairly 
shared (see article p. 36). “Science must also be 
conscious of its social function,” said one Latin-
American delegate, explaining why the scope of 
the text needs to be widened. “Research into 
stem cells and cloning does not for now aff ect 
the lives of most people. Th ey remain a hope for 
the future, but right now, people are dying 
because of poor health conditions. We must 
concentrate on this problem,” Henk ten Have 
added.
Bioethics

 “We have fi lled a legal, political and ethical 
void,” said Uruguay’s Ambassador to UNESCO, 
Pablo Sader, who chaired the governmental 
experts’ meetings to discuss the draft  conven-
tion developed by the International Bioethics 
Committee (IBC). “Th is document must inspire 
legislation and guide the debate in each coun-
try.” Its role is indeed to inspire and not to 
coerce: it is a declaration, which is not compul-
sory, rather than a far more constraining con-
vention. It may be too early for the latter. Th e 
21st century has only just begun. ◆
Samir Tounsi
