Radio Ada, the Voice of Those
Without a Voice
 A small radio station 120 miles from the Ghanaian capital 
is transformed into a community multimedia centre
Th e traditional apatam, the external reception 
area, serves as a recording studio at Radio Ada. 
Th is small radio station, heard on 93.3 FM, and 
located in Ada, 120 km east of Accra, the capital 
of Ghana, broadcasts “Th e Voice of the Dangme 
People,” the country’s third largest linguistic 
group. It is also the fi rst of a dozen stations in 
the country to become a UNESCO-funded 
community multimedia centre (CMC). 
“Th e CMC gives the population access to 
useful information about global warming, for 
example. In recent years, the sea has gained 
four metres on the shoreline,” says Radio Ana’s 
Manager, Kofi  Lamweh. He sees the station as 
the “voice of those without a voice”. His “com-
munity service” mission consists of providing 
information on international events or on the 
price of fi sh in the local markets, as well as in 
promoting national cohesion and protecting 
the Dangme cultural heritage.
| Starting operations
Radio Ada broadcasts from a gleaming little 
house. Th e renovation work is almost com-
pleted, the smell of fresh paint lingers in the air. 
As soon as the centre gets its internet connec-
tion, its fi ve computers will be operational. 
With its staff  of 15 paid employees and 50 vol-
unteers of all ages, the centre has the long-term 
goal to “create a team of trainers for the four 
local stations” implanted in the area to service a 
potential audience of 500,000. “It’s like a self-
reproducing cell,” says Kofi  Lamweh.
For now, he says “the priority is digital pro-
duction”, which means training in basic com-
puter skills, from scanner to desktop publishing. 
Th e responsibility of this task rests on 18-year-
old Chinedu, self-taught computer expert who 
is in charge of training. “He has even developed 
a soft ware programme that we use for music 
programming,” says the station manager. For 
the moment, six of Chinedu’s eight students 
are adults, but younger people are starting to 
follow. “Th rough the music, through reggae, 
they are becoming interested in what we do,” 
Chinedu says shyly.
“In terms of training, the community cen-
tres are more effi  cient than regional or national 
workshops, because follow-up can be problem-
atic,” says Hezekiel Dlamin advisor for com-
munications and information in the Accra 
UNESCO Offi  ce. He says that “nearly 20 cen-
tres per country will be established soon.” Th is 
initiative will supplement the one and only 
cybercafé in Ada, which opened this summer, 
and it will save future web surfers a 60 km trip 
to fi nd the nearest internet connection. 

But in a country where 40% of the population 
over the age of six has never been to school and 
only 3% has attended university, where the infor-
mal economy dominates, the priority for educa-
tion policy remains “achieving literacy and 
teacher training” rather than “specifi c internet 
training,” explains Boubacar Camara, education 
specialist at the UNESCO Offi  ce Accra. In order 
to provide “equitable access to quality education,” 
he says, education policy must include informa-
tion and communications technologies (ICT). 
Th e government is striving to meet this goal and 
even organized, in Accra in February 2005, the 
Second Africa Preparatory Conference, a regional 
conference preparing the World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS).
Together with the Education Ministry and 
the Universities of Cape Coast and Winneba, the 
UNESCO Offi  ce in Accra, in 2004, implemented 
a training programme for trainers with an 
emphasis on computer skills. “Over a thousand 
people have already benefi ted from it,” says Bou-
bacar Camara. In December 2004, a workshop 
was also held at the University of Ghana at  Legon 
on the free operating system Linux, bringing 
together about 15 universities. Further initiatives 
include a programming contest for secondary 
school students organized on February 26, 2005 
by the Ghana-India Kofi  Annan Centre of Excel-
lence in ICT, fl agship of the Ghanaian educa-
tional system. Th e winner was presented with a 
mobile phone while the winner’s school gained a 
computer. These types of initiatives should, 
in coming years, contribute to training new 
 battalions of Chinedus. ◆
Stéphane Auvray
