Paraguay and the Pirate’s Song
 Sadly, for geographic and 
economic reasons, Paraguay 
has become the world capital 
of pirated music.
In Ciudad del Este, 330 kilometres from Asun-
cion, the joke going around is that when direc-
tor Michael Mann arrives in town later this year 
to shoot a few scenes of his latest fi lm, Miami 
Vice, he’ll be able to buy illegal copies of his 
own movie – the fi nished version.
Joking aside, the most recent report pub-
lished by the International Federation of the 
Phonographic Industry (IFPI) calls Paraguay 
the world’s leading music pirating country. Of 
100 records sold in Paraguay, 99 are illegal cop-
ies. Paraguay tops the list of 31 countries in 
which illegal sales outstrip legal sales. Th e report 
also shows that Paraguay is a major transit sta-
tion for blank CDs, particularly those that end 
up in Brazil and Argentina. In a country with 
unemployment at 7.3% and under-employment 
at 24.1%, the IFPI fi gures are corroborated by 
the harsh reality of the street.
| Cracking down
In Asuncion, it is easy to buy a fi lm in DVD 
format or VCD (a format which can stock video 
or audio data and still photographs, although 
with poor resolution) before it opens in thea-
tres. Pirated fi lms and discs sell like hot cakes: 
at stoplights, at street corners, and even at cin-
ema entrances where a ticket can cost up to 
10,000 guaranis or US$1.50, the price of a 
pirated CD. Street vendors of illegally copied 
music, fi lms or electronic games can oft en be 
found in the vicinity of high schools, and some-
times set up shop a few metres from the court-
house or the customs offi  ce. 
Th e IFPI report was not appreciated by local 
authorities: the Director of Intellectual Prop-
erty at the Trade and Industry Ministry, Astrid 
Weller, called it exaggerated. Nonetheless, the 
government has put in place a National Plan on 
Intellectual Property to create a Special Techni-
cal Unit comprised of various authorities, 
including the armed forces, charged with appre-
hending those responsible for the production 
and sale of pirated products, an off ence punish-
able under Paraguayan law. 
Carlos Gonzalez Rufi nelli, director of the 
national intellectual property agency, 
announced measures to tighten border con-
trols, including the creation of a list of import-
ers of magnetic, optical and other support 
materials used to make counterfeit copies. In 

addition, the authorities will launch a campaign 
in schools to explaining the harm pirating 
infl icts on the country and its artists. 
But on the street, not even the poor quality 
keeps the buyers at bay. 
On a bad VCD, the picture and the sound 
are not always synchronized, or, since the fi lm 
was made in a theatre, the person sitting in 
front is visible. Oft en only half the fi lm has been 
recorded. And many of the CDs are defective 
and can’t be played. But the most compelling 
argument for buying pirated works isn’t qual-
ity, it’s the low price.
Yet Paraguay’s main source of revenue from 
the pirated products doesn’t come from local 
sales but from massive export. In the border 
regions, particularly Upper Parana, the police 
are constantly dismantling large production 
units equipped with the most sophisticated 
technology. Yet, these arrests are insuffi  cient to 
put an end to this “industry”, which fl ourishes, 
often with the complicity of authorities and 
local criminals. According to the 2005 Com-
mercial Piracy Report, 11 million blank CDs 
were already confi scated this year, twelve indict-
ments were handed down in two major cases 
linked to pirating and 57 import licences were 
withdrawn from suspect fi rms.
Living from one’s art has never been easy, 
but pirating complicates the situation even 
more. David Arriola, manager of Kamikaze, a 
record label that has been launching young Par-
aguayan talent for the past fi ve years, still can’t 
get over what happened to the nationally-
known rock group Paiko. “When we produced 
the fi rst CD, “Al natural”, it took a year before it 
was pirated. For the second, illegal copies were 
on the streets the day aft er the offi  cial release.... 
We were stunned,” he says. 
We have to put a stop to these practices, in 
the name of Shakespeare and Cervantes. ◆
Natalia Daporta
