Cultural  diversit y
The poorer countries 
are rarely able to help 
artists make a living 
from their art

The Global Alliance on All Fronts
 Launched by UNESCO in 2002, the Global Alliance helps the countries 
in the South to boost their cultural production.
Reinforcing the independent music industry 
in Colombia, sponsoring a competition of dig-
ital short fi lms in Jordan, developing copyright 
in Namibia, promoting traditional Tibetan 
weaving on the global market…These are 
examples of the projects implemented by 
UNESCO through the Global Alliance for Cul-
tural Diversity. The initiative, launched in 
2002, aims to strengthen the capacity of cul-
tural industries in developing countries in 
production and distribution. Th e challenge is 
major: as vehicles of identity and meaning, 
cultural goods and services hold signifi cant 
symbolic value and form a powerful compo-
nent of cultural diversity. But many countries 
lack the means necessary to develop these 
industries. Only rarely can they remunerate 
their artists so that they can make a living from 
their art, much less attract international atten-
tion to their works.
Th e Global Alliance therefore works to cre-
ate new partnerships between the state, the 
private sector and civil society, in order to cre-
ate conditions favourable to the expression of 
creativity and the plurality of ideas, as well as 
making them available and accessible to all.
| Economic dimension
Meanwhile, cultural goods and services com-
prise an important economic dimension. In the 
last few years, in fact, cultural and creative 
industries represent one of the most dynamic 
economic sectors. To help boost cultural enter-
prise, the Global Alliance works in three direc-
tions: normative action (regulations, legislation, 
employment benefits, copyright); capacity 
building in production; and access to funding. 
Th e Alliance mobilizes some 500 partners in 90 
countries: government agencies, businesses, 
NGOs, artists. Th e proliferation of partnerships 
between the state, the private sector and civil 
society make it possible to increase signifi cantly 
the sums needed for each project. In the last 
three years, these projects have raised nearly 
three million dollars.
Other initiatives are planned, such as the 
organization of a large forum on cultural diver-
sity in China at the end of 2005, the establish-

ment of government policy concerning books 
in Gambia, Guinea and Senegal, as well as meas-
ures to protect copyright and fi ght piracy in 
Lithuania, Bulgaria or Zimbabwe. In 2006, the 
Motion Picture Association (MPA), which 
brings together the Global Alliance and Holly-
wood studios, will stage workshops on produc-
tion. Th e Alliance has also initiated a network 
of “creative cities” that links cities possessing a 
rich tradition in literature, cinema, music, 
design or gastronomy. ◆
©
 U
N
E
S
C
O
/A
n
d
e
s/
C
Z
A
P
/A
S
A
www.unesco.org/en/courier/diversity 49
