RAISING THE CURTAIN 
ON AIDS
By decimating entire generations, 
the epidemic has emerged as a 
dramatic obstacle to sustainable 
development in Africa. By 
calling on Prosper Kompaoré, a 
specialist in interactive theatre, 
the UNESCO office in Dakar has 
chosen to tackle the issue of 
prevention in a different way. 
In the market square of Manga, a 
town located 105 kilometres east of 
Ouagadougou, vendors close their shops 
one after another as the sun dips lower. In the 
middle of cabarets selling dolo, the local millet beer, 
the troupe from the Burkinabe Theatre Workshop 
(ATB) starts setting up its performance area in 
front of an impatient crowd. In next to no time, the 
stage is set. The evening’s show: The Cough of the 
Serpent, a play to heighten awareness of tuberculosis 
– an illness often linked to HIV/AIDS – that is being 
presented at the request of the National Tuberculosis 
Programme and the regional health authority.
At the start of the play, a malfunctioning 
microphone prompts vocal protests from the 
audience members. And they continue to make their 
presence felt throughout the performance. Spectators 
shout out their disapproval of a “patient” who 
refuses to follow his treatment properly, or respond 
to questions from the actors, who keep them 
involved. At the end of the rowdy show, queries 
fly from all sides. The actors, joined by healthcare 
professionals, answer them. 
“How can we know if we have tuberculosis?” asks 
a man in the audience. 
Excerpts from the 
“AIDS and theatre” 
manual

message sticks in spectators’ minds. Thus, rather 
than piling on warnings against early sexual 
relations, the theatre instead shows a girl on stage 
confronted with the negative consequences: an 
unwanted pregnancy, expulsion from school, 
infection with HIV…. Everybody understands. And 
no one wants to identify with the reviled characters 
who reject infected people or show irresponsible 
behaviour.
BREAKING THE SILENCE
That is why UNESCO’s Regional Office in Dakar 
called on the director and founder of the ATB, 
Prosper Kompaoré. Devoted proponent of interactive 
theatre, he has already trained some 20 troupes in 
west Africa. “What gives this sickness its strength,” 
he explains, “is the silence surrounding it. Thanks 
to the theatre, we can get people to leave those 
deathly zones of silence and lead them to take on 
healthier behaviour.” At the door of the workshops 
he teaches, a manual titled “AIDS and Theatre” is 
available, produced by the Dakar Office to allow 
theatre workers to make authoritative statements on 
HIV/AIDS awareness. “It’s a teaching tool to educate 
young troupes in the different steps in creating a 
“You can’t diagnose it yourself, but if you have a 
cough that lasts more than two weeks, you have to 
get yourself to a health centre,” answers a member 
of the medical team. 
“I didn’t know that treatment was free. That’s 
good to know,” says Salif Tiendrebeogo, a village 
resident who happened across the play and stayed 
to watch.
The reactions, sometimes strongly worded, 
are the core of “forum theatre”, an interactive 
show that relies on direct participation from the 
audience. Extensively used by the ATB, this form 
of participatory theatre is today widely employed 
by NGOs and institutions to spread messages of 
prevention. There is an urgent need. With an HIV 
prevalence rate above 4%, Burkina Faso is one of 
the countries on the continent worst hit by HIV/
AIDS.
While more traditional information campaigns 
are now showing their limits, the theatre allows 
messages to be communicated to large groups 
of people whose attention has been grabbed. 
It is especially useful in communities with low 
levels of education. Dressed up as fiction, rules 
for prevention are more easily accepted. And the 
▲
In Burkina Faso, 
the prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS infection is 
higher than 4%
© Georges Gobet/AFP, Paris 

theatrical work themed on HIV/AIDS; the basics 
of building a character and directing,” Prosper 
Kompaoré says. In it, there are guidelines on how to 
make sure characters are not mere puppets spouting 
messages but reasonably rounded, with real 
psychological layers, and it explains how to develop 
plots based on problems linked to the illness 
– the difficulty in talking about sex with parents, 
infidelity, and how to negotiate the use of condoms. 
With his own troupe, the ATB, Prosper Kompaoré 
has written and presented many plays with 
HIV/AIDS as the theme. Some 15 years ago, there 
was The Sickness of the Century, inspired by the 
epidemic. Since, there have been Dangerous Liaisons 
and Sida, sid sida (taking its title from the French 
word for AIDS, Sida). For and Against tells the tale 
of a group of high school students who discover 
the devastation of HIV/AIDS. The main female 
protagonist, a girl brilliant at school but from a poor 
family, ends up giving herself to a rich, seropositive 
merchant to meet her family’s material needs. These 
forum theatre plays are put on either through the 
initiative of the ATB itself, or in partnership with 
certain institutions such as the Populations and the 
Fight Against HIV/AIDS Programme, the National 
Council for the Fight Against HIV/AIDS, and the 
Family Health Authority.
DRAMA AS A FLEXIBLE 
COMMUNICATION TOOL
“HIV/AIDS encompasses sexual issues, sometimes 
religion and culture too, and we have to be able 
to talk about it freely and we think that forum 
theatre lets us lift taboos and prompt people to 
break their silence, their shame, their passivity and 
their resignation. And during the shows, we’ve 
noticed that those who wouldn’t talk under normal 
circumstances express themselves, react,” says 
Prosper Kompaoré. 
And the approach is popular, as the packed tour 
schedule of the troupe shows. While the performers 
put on The Cough of the Serpent in Manga, another 
group of actors is in the village of Kayibo, some 
20 kilometres away, playing Land, about property 
issues. 
“We don’t believe that theatre by itself will 
revolutionise things, but we believe that we can’t 
change things by sidelining theatre because theatre 
has the advantage of being both a tool for mass 
communication and a tool for communicating locally. 
▲
It’s a flexible tool of communication, effective for 
raising certain sensitive topics,” Prosper Kompaoré 
explains. And AIDS is, indisputably, one of them. 
Mathieu Bonkoungou
Correspondent, Reuters agency, Ouagadougou 
(Burkina Faso)
Theatre is emerging 
as a more effective 
means of prevention 
than conventional 
public information 
methods 
