Back to the Future
 Dams are not the only way to capture water. Certain traditional water-
gathering technologies have proven effi  cient.
Typically, if governments want more water, 
they invariably demand a new dam. But there 
are other ways – ways that are oft en more effi  -
cient, cheaper and give control of water sup-
plies back to the communities who use them. 
Some believe it is time for a revival of ancient 
techniques in a modern setting – techniques 
that were forgotten during the 20th century 
could make a comeback in the 21st. 
Take the long underground water tunnels 
known as qanats. Th ey are one of the great engi-
neering treasures of the Middle East, Central 
Asia and North Africa. In these arid regions, 
rain falls only sporadically and mostly in the 
mountains. Th e water swift ly percolates under-
ground. Th e Persians long ago learned to exca-
vate these springs, ‘chasing’ the water back into 
the hillside by digging horizontal tunnels. 
In Iran alone there are an estimated 50,000 
qanats. Assembled end to end, they would reach 
two-thirds of the way to the moon. Wherever 
the Persians went, they took the secrets of 
qanats. Consequently, the technology spread 
along the Silk Road to Afghanistan and China, 
through Arabia and along the North coast of 
Africa as far as Spain.
As recently as the 1960s, their total discharge 
in Iran was equivalent to the flow of twelve 
River Niles. In the hot desert of central Iran, the 
ancient city of Yazd still uses qanats up to 60 
kilometres long to bring water from the snow-
covered Mount Sir. When an earthquake struck 
Bam in eastern Iran in late 2003, one of the fi rst 
discoveries made by aid workers was that the 
town was entirely dependent on qanats for 
water – and most of the tunnels had collapsed 
in the quake. 
| Reinvesting in old methods
Qanats are in decline because in many places, 
boreholes powered by modern water pumps 
have lowered water tables, drying up many 
qanats. But Andras Szollosi-Nagy, director of 
UNESCO’s Division of Water Sciences, says 
they have hydrological qualities that should be 
in great demand. They are self-regulating 
because, unlike electric pumps, they tap the 
aquifer only up to the limit of natural replen-
ishment. If properly designed and maintained, 
they are, as they call them in Yemen, “unfailing 
springs” that keep going in all but the worst 
droughts. 
Some modern water engineers believe that 
the diffi  cult and dangerous work of qanat dig-
ging could be mechanised. But meanwhile, says 
Szollosi-Nagy, there is a good case for making 
better use of existing qanats; and for protecting 
them by placing restrictions on pumped bore-
holes nearby.  
Th is is already the case in Oman, where the 
government has paid for extensive repairs to 
6,000 aflaj. In the Turfan basin in western 
China, more than a thousand qanats dug dur-
ing the Han and Qing dynasties were renovated 
in the 1990s. 
“It is also vitally important to conserve and 
research the basic skills and technologies of 
Terraced rice paddies 
in Java, Indonesia

qanats,” says Szollosi-Nagy, “as well as the 
structures themselves.” In an eff ort to do that 
UNESCO has sponsored the creation of an 
international museum and centre in the Iranian 
‘qanat capital’ of Yazd. 
| Terraces for mountain farming
Qanats are not the only technology worth revi-
talising for sustainable water use in arid zones. 
Th e terraced hillsides of Asia could play a simi-
lar role. Th ese huge and sophisticated earth-
works turn mountain slopes into towering 
‘staircases’ of narrow fi elds. Each step is irri-
gated by water brought down the mountainside 
from springs or reservoirs, using a network of 
canals, sluices, and pipes. 
Among the most spectacular examples are 
the rice terraces of northern Luzon, the largest 
island in the Philippines, which are now 


UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Growing rice 
on hillside terraces is one of the most character-
istic activities of the whole of Asia. Certainly no 
other societies have proved capable of sustain-
ing such dense populations in mountain areas 
for century aft er century. But the sheer hard 
labour involved in maintaining and farming the 
terraces and irrigation channels has caused 
many to be abandoned. Th e steep terraces and 
narrow access paths mean that most modern 
farm machinery cannot be used.
The stories of qanats and terraces seem 
remarkably similar. Can the world aff ord to lose 
the skills and insights that they contain? Th is is 
a critical issue to be resolved if the hilly areas of 
the world are to remain productive. ◆
 F.P
