Once regarded as the best universities 
in the region, Iraqi universities are 
today in a pitiful state. A round 
table focusing on revitalising higher 
education in Iraq, organized by 
UNESCO, was held in February in Paris. 
Its goals: evaluate the situation and 
define future needs.
In 2003 when the coalition forces moved in, 
Iraqi universities were already reduced 
to a pale shadow of their former selves. 
Gone was the time that they had established close 
ties with British universities, in the years before 
the Iran-Iraq war. Thousands of Iraqis studied for 
their doctorates at universities across the UK.
The flow stopped almost overnight. Iraqi 
academics quickly became isolated in a precarious 
university system where political allegiance was 
as important as intellectual competence. Many 
left, either because of political differences with 
Saddam Hussein’s regime or because the career 
opportunities were better overseas. Now, as 
democracy flickers into life and international aid 
for the stricken university system at last begins 
to be felt on the ground, the Diaspora is being 
encouraged to return.



PRECARIOUS FUTURE FOR 
IRAQI UNIVERSITIES

At Baghdad’s 
Mustansiriyah 
University, lab 
equipment  
is rudimentary
The country needs its elite more than ever. 
The universities, struggling to cope with a 
massive infrastructure deficit, are bulging with 
students. The situation is all the more critical 
as two Gulf wars have also contributed to 
damaging the system. Idris Salih, Iraq’s deputy 
minister for higher education, told a round table 
meeting in Paris convened by UNESCO’s higher 
education division that 85% of the universities’ 
infrastructure was destroyed in the months of 
chaos as the coalition struggled to gain control.
In any case, reconstruction is clearly going to be 
founded as much on Iraqi as on imported know-
how. After the fall of the old regime, USAid put 
together a $20 million strategy based on consortia 
of US universities with partner universities in Iraq. 
A few weeks later, Qatar launched a $15 million 
project to revitalise the universities as part of a 
$100 million reconstruction plan. But Mr Salih 
says: “We were unable to benefit from financial 
resources from donors because they arrived late or 
were not paid at all.”
PROBLEMS WITH AID DELIVERY 
AND SECURITY
Progress on the ground has been limited, 
partly because of security issues. The USAid 
programme was predicated on the inclusion 
of non-US universities in the partnerships, but 
only a small number joined up. Only Oxford 
University represented the UK, as a partner with 
the State University of New York Stony Brook 
in a consortium for rebuilding Archeology, 
Assyriology, and Environmental Health. But 
Oxford’s involvement ended with the tragic death 
of the one academic who was pivotal to the 
project.
Some countries, notably the UK through the 
British Council and Germany through DAAD, have 
given direct assistance in the form of intensive 
training courses for university administrators 
and updating opportunities for academics in 
economically and socially strategic fields.
UNESCO has already drawn on some of 
the Qatari US$15 million to send medical and 
engineering laboratory equipment and textbooks. 
At the end of 2004, a shipment of US$4.6 million 
of equipment and materials for medical and 
related disciplines such as dentistry, pharmacy 
and nursing, as well as for engineering faculties, 
was delivered to universities in Iraq. It also 
included textbooks for students and reference 
books valued at a further US$1 million. Ten tons 
of books were delivered by the British Council to 
universities in Baghdad and Basra. 
New pledges were announced from Qatar 
and the Republic of Korea during the Paris 
conference. The First Lady of Qatar, Sheikha 
Mozah Bint Nasser Al-Misand, who is a Special 
UNESCO Envoy for Basic and Higher Education, 
pledged a further US$1 million dollars; Korea 
pledged US$200,000; and the Doha Bank pledged 
US$30,000.
“These donations are warmly appreciated and 
will be used for the implementation of concrete 
projects for the benefit of students, academics 
and researchers,” Mr Koichiro Matsuura, 
UNESCO’s Director-General, said. But that 
depends on promised aid being delivered. In 
February one Iraqi university president privately 
estimated that barely 10% of the resources 
pledged had materialised on the ground. The 
amount is not sufficient to stem the brain drain 
affecting Iraq. Numerous Iraqi academics leave 
in search of opportunities closed to them in their 
own country. One initiative to be taken further is 
to encourage the Iraqi academic Diaspora to be 
encouraged to return, through temporary leave of 
absence from universities elsewhere in the Middle 
East or in the West.
Salaries are being increased – from A$150-400 
a month to A$1,000-1,500. But the most severe 
disincentive is the security situation. Baghdad 
University president Mosa Al-Mosawe said that 
since the fall of the old regime 47 academics 
had been assassinated – 17 of them from his 
own university. Kidnapping for ransom is rife 
– “the threats come from lazy students to get 
some finance, especially near the time of final 
assessments”.
BRAIN DRAIN
Mr Salih said that more than 2,000 academics 
had left Iraq under the old regime. Since its fall 
a further 260 have followed them “The 19,000 
[who remain] are heroes working under difficult 
conditions – lack of electricity, power cuts every 
day, terrorism and the fear of terrorism that 
weighs on them every day,” he says. But whether 
academics who have relocated to countries where 

secularism is the norm would return to an Islamist 
university system to teach segregated classes is 
highly questionable.
Meanwhile some experts question whether it is 
sensible to rebuild the system along the lines left 
by the previous regime. Some universities, created 
to serve political rather than academic needs, 
demand vast injections of resources to enable 
them to offer quality higher education. But are 
they worth the investment? Jairam Reddy, who 
guided South African universities’ emergence from 
the apartheid era, has recommended a critical 
appraisal to determine whether unsustainable 
institutions should be shored up, or efforts 
concentrated on bringing stronger universities 
back to their former levels. Georges Haddad, 
director of UNESCO’s Higher Education Division,, 
was upbeat about the prospects. “It is important 
for us to have a strong, democratic Iraq…Without 
higher education there is no future. I do not 
expect the moon but it is important that the 
dialogue is started and partnership is under way,” 
he said.
UNESCO in action education
MOVE QUOTE
As the round table wrapped up its proceedings 
there was a clear acceleration of pledges of 
support – the inclusion of Iraqi academic 
leaders within the world university community, 
scholarships and exchanges.
Mr Salih concluded: “Higher education 
needs more help – this is the key to the future 
in building a new Iraq based on multi-party 
democracy and respect for human rights.”.
Since then, a real dynamic has taken form 
around the projects initiated by the round 
table and the Higher Education Division is 
receiving offers of cooperation from institutions, 
governments and other donors.
David Jobbins
Journalist, Times Higher Education 
Supplement
At Baghdad 
University, a black 
banner recalls 
the names of slain 
teachers
▲
© Samir Mizban/AP/Sipa, Paris 
