Ocean s
What Atmosphere!
 Oceans absorb a large quantity of the greenhouse eff ect gases that are 
emitted.  But how long can they go on acting as carbon reservoirs?
An inseparable couple runs the earth’s climate: 
the ocean and the atmosphere.  By constantly 
exchanging their energies, they carry and dis-
tribute the heat the earth receives. If the atmos-
phere seems to have «forgotten» disturbances it 
underwent 15 days prior, the ocean can remem-
ber climatic variability for decades, and even 
centuries.
Th e ocean, then, sets the rhythm. “Th e most 
obvious sign of the increase in temperature 
recorded since the beginning of the industrial 
era is an elevation in sea level,” explains Guy 
Jacques, marine ecologist and co-author of a 
book about climate change (1). Since the end of 
the 19th century, the average temperature at the 
earth’s surface has gone up a little less than one 
degree. Th e superfi cial layer of the oceans, down 
to about a hundred metres in depth, heats up 
and dilates, making the water level rise.  Th e 
20th century has recorded a yearly increase of 
1.8 mm, a rate that has been accelerating since 
the beginning of the 1990s. 
| Increased acidifi cation
Paradoxically, oceans reduce global warming. 
Indeed, they largely absorb the most important 
of the greenhouse eff ect gases: carbon dioxide 
or CO2. But their storage capacity has its limits. 
“Th e only way to get a defi nite idea about how 
oceans function is by modeling this phenome-
non,” says Maria Hood, programme specialist 
at the IOC. Especially since decreasing concen-
tration of the greenhouse eff ect gases is not all 
that is at stake: water acidifi cation caused by the 
dissolution of CO2 threatens the chemical bal-
ance of the ocean’s superfi cial layer. Th is phe-
nomenon could cause damage to marine 
ecosystems. In more acidic water, coral, calcif-
erous phytoplankton and shellfi sh have more 
diffi  culty secreting the carbonate that forms 
their skeletons. Fifty years from now, coral 
reefs, already weakened because of an increase 
in water temperature, could disappear faster 
than they form. And they make up one of the 
richest and most vital ecosystems known to 
man. ◆
M.E.
Figures
 The average depth of the ocean is 3,800 metres. The deepest part, located in 
the Pacifi c, attains a depth of 11,000 metres.
 Oceans contain 1,370 million km3 of saltwater; the Pacifi c alone represents half 
of that amount.
 Oceans and the ice fl oe make up in volume almost 98% of the planet’s water.
 Each year 380,000 km3 of water evaporate from the earth’s surface.
 The oceans have absorbed approximately 120 tons of carbon since 1800.
 Average global sea level has risen by probably 18 cm during the 20th century.
Sources: NOAA, Satellite Topex/Poseidon
Rising water 
temperature is a direct 
threat to coral reefs
1. Jacques, G. and Le Treut, H. 2004. “Climate Change” (Le changement clima-
tique). UNESCO Publishing (IOC Ocean Forum Series.)
www.unesco.org/en/courier/oceans 15
