The Inuit, First Witnesses
of Climate Changes
 In the Arctic, Inuit people have been noticing the signs of global 
warming for years. 
As a child, Shari Fox Gearheard used to dig 
snow caves around her house in Ontario (Can-
ada), crawl inside and fall asleep, “because it 
was so peaceful”. A couple of decades later, now 
a postdoctoral researcher with the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) based at Harvard University, she lives 
with the Inuit people of Clyde River, Nunavut, 
on the eastern shores of Baffi  n Island (Canada). 
In line with the work of UNESCO’s LINKS and 
MOST programmes that document and pro-
mote indigenous knowledge, she is recording 
the Inuit’s observations of climate change.
According to one of the elders Gearheard 
has interviewed, the weather has become 
uggianaqtuq, which, roughly translated, means 
‘like a familiar friend behaving strangely’. About 
40 or 50 years ago, a snow storm would last for 
four or fi ve days. On the sixth or seventh day 
the weather would improve, and remain good 
for the rest of the season. Nowadays the storms 
come suddenly with no warning, and more 
oft en. Th is means it is hard for Inuit to know 
when it is safe to set off  on long hunting trips. 
“Some people from my community lost their 
lives because they got stranded in a storm that 
happened unexpectedly,” says Norman Attun-
gala, an elder in Baker Lake, several hundred 
kilometres inland. 
Wind patterns have also changed, adding a 
new danger to hunting trips. “Th e wind is pack-
ing the snow too hard to build igloos,” Gear-
heard explains, “making it impossible to build a 
shelter and wait out unexpected bad weather.” 
Meanwhile, the motorised skidoos that most 
hunters now use are less reliable than tradi-
tional dog sleds. “Dogs always knew how to get 
back to their home camp, even during a storm 
or at night,” says Th omas Qaqimat from Baker 
Lake. 

For Gearheard, the Inuit observations can 
complement scientific knowledge and vice 
versa. “As remote sensing, climate models and 
weather models move to finer scales, Inuit 
should be partners with scientists, because they 
can provide ‘ground truth’ to test remote fi nd-
ings.” But, she says, the two cannot always be 
mapped directly onto one another. “In science,” 
she says, “weather is separated into tempera-
ture, pressure, wind, snow depth, and so on. 
For the Inuit it is a complex whole.” 
| Exchange projects
It is also instructive when science and local 
observations don’t match. For the Inuit, Gear-
heard notes, aniuvat – snow patches that never 
melt – have “always” been there. But scientifi c 
studies of lichen on rocks show that once upon 
a time, further back in history than Inuit mem-
ory goes, the snow was not there. So the melting 
aniuvat “is not necessarily a sign of global warm-
ing, but of the environment going back to nor-
mal.” Th e Inuit fi nd this interesting, she adds.
Th e Inuit may not know that the tempera-
ture of permafrost has risen by two degrees over 
the past decades (see box), but they do see their 
rivers and lakes drying up, as the no longer fro-
zen ground becomes porous, while roads buckle 
and houses and trees collapse or lean over at 
bizarre angles. Meanwhile, in Baker Lake, an 
island to which locals used to canoe in summer 
can now be reached on foot. 
Indigenous peoples from the region are now 
getting together to pool their experiences, as in 
the exchange project between the Inuit of Clyde 
River and Iñupiat of Barrow (Alaska). And, 


through the Inuit Circumpolar Conference 
(ICC), they have even formed a pressure group 
to sue the United States, which they accuse of 
destroying their way of life by polluting, while 
being unwilling to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions through the Kyoto Protocol. ◆
