The Courier looks back
since it began publication, The UNESCO Courier has devoted many issues 
o water-related problems. here is a brief trip down memory lane.
the rush for water
november 2005 
Reducing by half the number of people 
in the world deprived of clean water, 
between now and 2015.  
Water for people, water for life
october 2003  
On the occasion of the International 
Year of Freshwater, a flood of promises, 
a trickle of progress.  
striking peace 
on troubled waters
october 2001 - 
The mirage of the “water wars.”  
What price water?
february 1999
 Limited supplies, growing demand for this 
rare resource.
Water of life
may 1993   
This issue marks thirty years since 
UNESCO launched the International 
Hydrological Decade in 1964, the first truly 
international scientific and educational 
effort in hydrology. Among the most 
significant fruits of such efforts are the 
drawing up of hydrological maps 
particularly useful for the world’s 
water-short developing countries. 
Ten years later, UNESCO created the 
International Hydrological Programme, 
with the aim of finding solutions to the 
problems of countries with different 
geographical and climatic conditions 
and at different levels of technological 
and economic development. 
the wonder of water 
January 1985
Every living thing consists mostly of water. 
A human being is about 65 per cent water, 
an elephant 70, a potato 80 and a tomato 
95. Yet the benefits of water are not evenly 
distributed. Over half the people in the 
Third World lack clean drinking water, 
three-quarters have no sanitation, while 
three-quarters of human illness is related 
to lack of clean water and sanitation. Five 
years after the launch of the International 
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation 
Decade, this issue examines the current 
situation. 
a world water famine 
can it be averted?
february 1978 
“If nothing is done, water resources in 
the world’s populated areas will be nearly 
exhausted by the year 2015.” Such is the 
bleak opening line of this issue, one year 
after the United Nations Water 
Conference. Held in Mar del Plata 
(Argentina), the 1,500 delegates from 
116 countries faced a daunting task: 
some $100 billion must be invested 
by 1990 to provide the world’s urban and 
rural areas with adequate water supplies, 
while a further $100 billion of investment 
will be need by 1990 for irrigation. 
man in quest for water
June 1970 -  
At mid-point in the International 
Hydrological Decade, the vast programme 
has mobilized hydrologists the world 
over for man’s first concerted attempt to 
take stock of his diminishing fresh water 
resources and to coordinated worldwide 
research on better ways of making use of 
them. The issue examines the historical 
and scientific background of the problem 
and describes some major areas 
where this international cooperation 
has been in action.
Water and life
July/august 1964 
In preparation for the 1965 launch 
of the International Hydrological Decade, 
this double issue on water highlighted 
our constantly increasing need for water. 
The lead article warned that in 20 years’ 
time, the demand for water will roughly 
double. It is the domain of hydrology 
to research different forms in which 
the world’s waters exist, their circulation 
and distribution, their interactions 
with the environment, including 
their responses to human activity.
José Banaag 
