I gram. They were then evaluated once 
a year until age 11, then several more 
times in the course of their later lives. 
The results showed that they were 
more successful than the rest, as 65% 
of them finished high school, versus 
only 45% of those who did not partici-
pate in the programme. They also re-
ported higher earnings (60% of them 
make more than US$20,000 annually, 
versus 40% in the other group). “Gen-
erally speaking, there is a very high re-
turn on investment. This is an important 
fact for poor countries to take into con-
sideration,” comments Nick Burnett, 
Director of the EFA Global Monitoring 
Report, whose 2007 edition coming 
out on 26 October focuses on early 
childhood education. Investing in early 
childhood is thus a key to reducing 
poverty.
Yet early childhood – meaning the 
period from birth until primary school 
age – is still treated as the poor relative 
in education. In almost half the coun-
tries in the world, no formal structure 
t appears a priori that all conditions 
have been met for early childhood care 
and education to be the focus of atten-
tion from all sides. First, the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child, with its 
near universal adoption, has helped 
to shape early childhood policies. It’s 
also the first goal of Education for All, 
taken on by the international commu-
nity as an outcome of the 2000 World 
Education Forum in Dakar. We know, 
furthermore, that children’s early years 
determine their future, notably their 
performance at school, as numerous 
studies have shown. 
The best-known study on the subject 
is the High/Scope Perry Preschool 
programme, conducted in the United 
States between 1962 and 1967 and 
followed up at regular intervals since. 
The study examines the lives of 123 
African Americans attending the pre-
school in Ypsilanti (Michigan), born 
in poverty and at high risk of failing in 
school. At ages 3 and 4, the subjects 
received a high-quality preschool pro-
                            The first years of children’s lives strongly influence their future 
                         and particularly their performance in school. numerous studies show 
    that investing in early childhood care and education pays off, notably in developing countries. 
              nonetheless, efforts made to meet early childhood care needs are generally insufficient.
learning
is Child’s Play
exists for early childhood education, 
and public spending in many cases 
remains paltry. 
Poor relative
What donors give for early child-
hood education represents on the 
average 10% of what they give for pri-
mary school. Differences are marked 
among regions: prevalent in industrial-
ized countries, pre-primary schooling 
reaches 62% in Latin America and 
the Caribbean, far ahead of South and 
West Asia (32%), the Arab States 
(16%) or Sub-Saharan Africa (12%). 
(Source: 2007 EFA Global Monitoring 
Report) 
These figures require further interpre-
tation, because one characteristic of 
early childhood education is not rely-
ing entirely on educational institutions. 
“Contrary to what happens in the pri-
mary and secondary sectors, it involves 
actors in the informal system, such as 
families and communities,” explains 
Hye-Jin Park of the UNESCO Basic 
Elementary school at Sampubangin village, Markham Valley.

Education Division. While in Europe 
we consider that the state has a legiti-
mate role, this is not the case in other 
regions. Some countries consider 
early childhood to be entirely the re-
sponsibility of private initiative. “There is 
no general consensus on what domain 
is the state’s and what is the family’s,” 
says Burnett.
Learning 
to live in society
“In fact, it’s not easy to define what is 
good for children,” adds Anne-Marie 
Chartier, teacher and researcher on 
the history of education in Paris. A 
recent example: the debate in France 
between teachers and child psychia-
trists on whether children should start 
school at two years old. The issue is 
all the more controversial because 
early childhood education concerns 
not only education, but also nutrition, 
health and cognitive development. 
“What you learn at that age,” says 
Pepa Del Val, teacher at Our Lady 
Of Wisdom School in Madrid, “is of 
course to hold a pencil, but it’s more 
about sharing and respecting others 
– becoming little people who can live 
in a society.” 
Over time, early childhood care and 
education is making progress almost 
everywhere in the world: preschool 
attendance has tripled since 1970. 
“More and more women want to 
work. This trend, along with the de-
cline of the traditional role of the fam-
ily, increases the demand,” explains 
Burnett. Nonetheless, the children 
who stand to benefit from early lear-
ing opportunities are those most 
likely to be excluded. Good quality 
programmes have the potential to 
advance children’s rights and make a 
dent into staggering figures of depriva-
tion: even today 10.5 million children 
in the world die of avoidable diseases 
before the age of five.  
Agnès Bardon. 
