street football
in Paso del rey
                        parallel to million dollar soccer contracts, rigged games, 
            doping problems, blows with the head and red cards, a new style of soccer
                  playing is emerging and it goes beyond the sport itself. 
          street soccer is gaining ground and popularity in many developing countries 
                          and aims at creating a social network in difficult neighborhoods.
The Club Atlético Defensores del 
Chaco, based in Paso del Rey, 
West of Buenos Aires, is reachable 
through a highway where golf clubs 
and private country clubs lie side by 
side with slumps. 
Almost an hour away from the 
Argentinian capital by bus, the Fun-
dación Defensores del Chaco’s 
head office is located among shan-
ty houses and half tared streets. 
This is where 1500 young men and 
women play handball, volleyball, 
basketball, and above all soccer in 
a different way. 
This year, the Defensores Club 
represented Argentina in the first 
street soccer World Cup ever. It 
took place in Germany this year, 
parallel to the FIFA World Cup and 
with street soccer’s specific rules. 
Meetings are organized in uncov-
ered spaces, either in fallow fields 
or in open air grounds and games 
are played without a referee – which 

– unemployment has left the neigh-
borhood completely shattered. Vio-
lence, resulting from a lack of space 
for education and entertainment has 
given way to blatant apathy, desola-
tion and desperation. The State has 
been completely absent, so we ur-
gently decided to do something.” 
In Paso del Rey, as in most places 
in South America, throwing a soccer 
ball and letting it roll on the ground 
will get children rushing from all 
directions and ready to kick it, as 
shown by the ground-breaking ini-
tiative ”Soccer for Peace” (“Fútbol 
para la paz”) created in Colombia. 
The “Soccer for peace” initiative was 
instigated after the assassination of 
Andrés Escobar – a professional 
soccer player who shot an acciden-
tal auto-goal in a game against the 
United States at the 1994 World 
Cup in Los Angeles. Fabián and 
Julio started taking time from there 
own work schedule to train young-
sters. “When I was a teenager, the 
hero in the neighbourhood was very 
often the toughest bully, the most 
reknown thief, the one that took the 
most drugs”, Julio Jiménez recalls. 
“Now, those who decide to play in 
our team, those who choose to train 
and fulfill the Club’s requirements 
are respected,” he adds. 
With time, and thanks to its athletic 
successes and funding from several 
national and international organiza-
tions, the Club has developed sev-
eral other activities and now counts 
a variety of sports, a folkloric music 
group, a weaving workshop, a paint-
ing studio, a percussions group, a 
first aid health center as well as a 
legal center, which aims at facilitat-
ing access to legal support for the 
Paso del Rey community. In addi-
tion to the youth teams, housewives 
and retirees also take part in some 
of Defensores’ activities. And aspi-
rations do not end here: in a neigh-
borhood of 250.000 inhabitants 
with a single primary school where 
1.800 students are packed in three 
classrooms of 4, the Fundación has 
already purchased land in order to 
build an additional school this year.
Rumbo in South Africa 
in 2010
The recipe undeniably works: by 
the end of 2005 the South America 
Street Soccer final, promoted by 
UNICEF and UNDP, was played in 
the middle of the 9 de Julio Avenue 
- Buenos Aires’ main artery - while 
at the “Other World Cup” in Ger-
many this year, 22 teams from the 
five continents were present. But 
when it comes down to it, what is 
the difference between this type of 
soccer and the traditional eleven 
player soccer teams, with winners 
and losers? Matías who is a sec-
ond year student of Economics and 
a member of the Defensores team 
that participated in the Germany 
Street Soccer World Cup, has it all 
figured out: “In traditional soccer, 
competitiveness and interests at 
stake are such that it ends up gen-
erating more violence.” Those who 
witnessed the insults, head kick and 
expulsion, which took place dur-
ing the France-Italy final during the 
2006 World Cup in Germany know 
all too well that the facts unfor- 
tunately confirm Matias’ words.
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz, 
in Buenos Aires, (Argentina).
Streetfootball in Buenos Aires (Argentina).

Streetfootball in Buenos Aires (Argentina). The “Obelisco” monument can be seen in the 
background.
