I Also, in 1996, the UN Convention 
to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) 
was adopted “to combat deserti-
fication and mitigate the effects of 
drought in countries experiencing se-
rious drought and/or desertification, 
in particular in Africa.” 
Drylands were at the centre of 
UNESCO’s earliest efforts at inter-
national scientific cooperation in the 
study of natural resources. In 1951, 
the Organization launched its first in-
ternational research programme deal-
ing with arid zones. Today, UNESCO 
n the 1950s, a sense of great opti-
mism prevailed that we could green 
the world’s deserts. It was believed 
that techniques such as cloud seed-
ing using silver-iodide could bring 
rainfall to dry areas, improved irriga-
tion techniques could boost agri-
cultural production in the drylands, 
and selective breeding could create 
livestock less dependent on water. In 
short, we thought that poverty in the 
world’s drylands could be reduced 
through technology. 
Half a century later, technological 
optimism has been replaced by rea- 
lism and concern. The belief that we 
can control our climate has given way 
to concerns about human impact on 
the environment, in particular global 
warming. 
Current climate scenarios predict 
that the driest regions of the world 
will become even drier. The availabi- 
lity of freshwater, the most precious 
resource in drylands, is reaching criti-
cal quality threshold levels, even in 
temperate zones. Despite technolog-
ical advances in genetic modification 
of organisms to be drought and pest 
resistant, dryland countries are still 
among the poorest in the world. 
The last fifty years have shown us 
that the ecological and socio-eco-
nomic situation in drylands is not a 
simple equation governed by fac-
tors such as climate, soil, water and 
vegetation. Market speculation and 
enormous price fluctuations in com-
modities such as cotton can affect 
the income of a rural farmer in a re-
mote village in Mali, in the same way 
that droughts or floods will affect his 
or her harvest.
From realism to hope
Despite these challenges, there is 
hope for drylands. The world has re- 
cognized the degradation of drylands 
by proclaiming 2006 the International 
Year of Deserts and Desertification. 
                         in the 1950s, scientists thought that technology could green the world’s deserts. 
                  today, technological optimism has been replaced by realism and concern. 
      on the occasion of an international conference on the future of drylands to be held in tunis 
on 19-21 June 2006, this edition of the UNESCO Courier is dedicated to the topic of desertification.
Turning back 
The sands of Time?
Desertification - Dogon Country (Mali).

2006: 
International Year of Deserts 
and Desertification
1996: 
UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD)

programmes, such as the Programme 
on Man and the Biosphere (MAB), 
and the International Hydrological 
Programme (IHP) continue to inno-
vate. Both programmes run dryland 
research projects worldwide, such as 
at the Omayed Biosphere Reserve in 
Egypt which provides clean drinking 
water to Bedouins using solar power. 
Bringing children  
and teachers onboard 
To help future generations to com-
bat desertification, a wealth of exist-
ing scientific knowledge has been 
transformed into educational tools 
for primary schools. The “Education 
Kit on Combating Desertification” in-
forms students and teachers alike on 
the problems of drylands, and gives 
examples of simple measures every-
one can take. This kit has now been 
translated into Arabic, Chinese, Eng-
lish, French, German, Hindi, Mongol, 
Russian and Spanish. 
The MAB Programme is currently 
developing a new teaching resource 
kit for dryland countries to stimulate 
students’ creativity in environmental 
education.
The Future of Drylands Conference, 
to be held in Tunis in June 2006, will 
review the current state-of-knowl-
edge of dryland ecosystems and the 
socio-economics of dryland develop-
ment in order to provide scientific and 
technical advice to decision-makers. 
It also aims to define future paths of 
research into drylands, specially pro-
moting application-oriented science 
for the sustainable development of 
dryland regions. 
This conference marks 50 years of 
dryland research in the UN System: 
let us be optimistic again on the fu-
ture of drylands by fostering global 
partnerships for development in line 
with the Millennium Development 
Goals.  
Thomas Schaaf
