T
                                         increased farming and rising global temperatures are expanding 
                                                the gobi Desert in china. are tree planting initiatives enough 
                                                      to return wildlife and vegetation to the region?
china’s  
season of dusT
his year, on 16-17 April, a single dust 
storm dumped nearly 300,000 tons 
of sand on Beijing before moving 
on to Korea and Japan. Sentinels 
of desertification, the storms have 
come to be known as the “fifth sea-
son” or dust season. 
Desertification in China’s most fa-
mous desert, the Gobi, has been in 
progress since before the 1950s, 
but it was from this point on that the 
desert’s expansion accelerated into 
full force. According to China’s En-
vironmental Protection Agency, dur-
ing a three year period in the mid-
nineties, the desert had expanded 
by 52, 400 square kilometers. And 
with the Olympic Games com-
ing up in 2008, the Gobi Desert 
creeps nearer to the capital at a 
rate of 3km per year. Today, it lurks 
just 160km outside Beijing.
Planting trees 
to reclaim the desert
Beginning in 1978, a huge “green-
ing” campaign was waged to com-
bat desertification. In the 1980s, a 
tree planting initative was organized 
for the protection and management 
of forest resources culminating with 
the creation of National Tree Planting 
Day. On 12 March each year, people 
from all walks of life plant trees around 
the north regions of the country in the 
worst hit areas. 
In the late 1970s global warming 
became a hot topic in China as ave- 
rage annual temperatures began to 
rise by 0.5 – 2.0 degrees Celsius, 
causing the surface soil to become 
especially dry. 
Deserts throughout different cli-
mates have always expanded and 
— when cool enough precipita-
tion is available — reduced back to 
their original size. But if the climate 
does not get any cooler, problems 
begin to arise. 
The dramatic rise in temperature 
and sparse vegetation cover of 
Trees in the desert, which was once a town (inhabited in the 1960s and 70s).

Average 
annual temperatures 
have been rising 
0.5 – 2.0 degrees Celsius 
since the 1970s.

Mongolia, with over 40% of its terri-
tory encompassed within the Gobi 
Desert, makes desertification here a 
huge environmental concern. It has 
been estimated that around 80% 
of its total territory is under serious 
threat of desertification. With inad-
equate livestock water supplies and 
poor pasture utilization, due to both 
a population and domestic animal in-
crease, it seems humans are chiefly 
to blame for what has already hap-
pened, and what will happen in years 
to come.
Reasons for hope
It seems that some reforestation pro- 
jects are bearing fruit, such as efforts 
being made in the Maowusu Desert, 
located between the southern Inner 
Mongolia Autonomous Region and 
northern Shaanxi. Forty years ago, 
the desert was just 500 meters away 
from the city of Yulin; as of June 2005, 
it stands over 50km away according 
to Yao Zhongxin of the Shaanxi Pro-
vincial Forestry Bureau. The area of 
desert in Shaanxi has been pushed 
back 275,000 hectares since 1999. 
That is a marvelous feat and some-
thing Beijing should strive towards. 
The problem of displacement is also 
a concern in the Gobi. With the des-
ert growing anywhere from 2,000-
10,000 square kilometers per year, 
the resulting number of refugees is on 
the rise. Chinese scientists report that 
there are now desert refugees in three 
provinces—Inner Mongolia, Ningxia 
and Gansu. In Gansu province alone 
there are around 4,000 villages that 
face abandonment. Over the next de-
cade, 180,000 residents living close 
to Beijing will need to relocate as well 
due to all the measures that will be put 
in place to decrease desertification 
gaining in on the capital. 
Today, tourists in the Gobi are told of 
times past when “instead of a lifeless, 
flat expanse of hot, arid land, the area 
was rich with wildlife and vegetation, 
inhabited by camel breeding families.” 
This reminds us that the deserts are 
not some wild force out of our con-
trol fighting for survival, but indeed 
fragile eco-systems needing proper 
care and attention. Attention that is 
desperately lacking.
Victoria Hamilton 
in Beijing
Over 40% of its territory encompassed within 
the Gobi Desert, makes desertification here a 
huge environmental concern.
