                                  thanks to a campaign sponsored by unesCo, 
                        Colombia turns the spotlight on safeguarding 
                               its intangible cultural heritage.
CultIvatIng 
ColombIan tradItIons
“The Carnival of Barranquilla “.

doAcommercial aired in prime time recent-
ly on Colombian radio and television 
begins with a murmur, which is gradu-
ally amplified until several languages 
can be distinguished. Some sound as 
if they are related to Mandarin, others 
to the very marked phonetics of Slavic 
languages. Then, in the midst of the 
babble, you recognize a poem in 
Spanish by the great Colombia poet 
José Asunción Silva. At that point the 
audience grasps that all the languages 
just heard were indigenous. 
The ad ends with a message under-
lining that Colombia is a multicultural, 
multilingual country. Another spot stars 

the Mohán, a sylvan spirit of rivers and 
forests that farmers used to fear; yet 
another depicts pise (rammed earth) 
wall-building technique, a legacy of 
the Amerindians. Even the Pusandao, 
a Pacific Coast stew prepared with 
manioc, yams, fish and coconut milk, 
makes a subject for an ad. 
Colombia, with its wealth of 83 in-
digenous peoples and nearly 70 lan-
guages and dialects, intends to make 
the most of its intangible heritage 
from now on, to the point of launching 
a major awareness campaign. “Show 
who you are” was the slogan for the 
entire campaign, financed for the 
sum of US$ 150,000 by UNESCO, 
the Andrés Bello Convention and the 
Colombian government. 
UNESCO’s proclamation in 2003 of 
the Barranquilla Carnival as a master-
piece of the oral and intangible heri-
tage of humanity contributed signifi-
cantly to Colombia’s realization of the 
value of its heritage. 
The Barranquilla Carnival encom-
passes cultural events in more than 
50 villages and small towns along the 
banks of the Magdalena river. Tales 
are told of men turned into alligators 
and of Indians disguised as women 
to avenge the honour of their wives, 
abducted by Spaniards, all to the 
rhythm of cumbia music and drums 
that pound incessantly for five days.
Taking inventory 
of traditions
Coinciding with the proclamation, the 
Ministry of Culture launched a series 
of initiatives aimed at implementing the 
mandates articulated in the UNESCO 
Convention, soon to be ratified. First it 
set up a Sub-Directorate of Intangible 
Heritage, which assists communities 
in taking inventory of their oral tradi-
tions. 
That’s not all. “Thanks to the work-
shops that we organized in five re-
gions in the country, intangible heri-
tage has become fashionable,” claims 
Emiro Díaz, programming director at 
the Colombian Institute of Anthropolo-
gy and History (ICANH), organization 
charged by the Ministry to formulate 
conservation policies. 
In November 2005, when the Min-
istry’s work on the Convention was 
well underway, UNESCO proclaimed 
the palenquera culture as Colombia’s 
second masterpiece of Oral and In-
tangible Heritage. San Basilio de 
Palenque is a tiny and very poor vil-
lage inhabited by the descendants 
of slaves who rebelled against the 
Spanish crown in the 18th century 
and declared themselves an indepen-
dent territory. UNESCO’s intention is 
to preserve their language, a blend of 
Spanish and Bantu; their music, which 
is essentially African; their knowledge 
of traditional medicine; and their fu-
neral rites.
Tangible  
results
“It’s a very special case,” explains 
Betsy Elena Hernández, who works 
for the Sub-Directorate of Intangible 
Heritage. “Palenque needs not only 
policy to preserve its culture but also 
the means to fight poverty. We are 
talking about a village with no drain-
age system, which only gets electricity 
for a few hours a day. The Ministry 
wants to attack on both fronts.” 
Meanwhile, in Baranquilla, there are 
already tangible results. Tourism in-
creased by 20 per cent last year, ac-
cording to Chamber of Commerce 
figures. In addition, several artisans 
are learning the traditional techniques 
for making masks and carnival cos-
tumes. 
Intangible cultural heritage is now 
sparking interest in the most remote 
areas of Colombia, such as the sou- 
thern tropical forest where more than 
70 per cent of Colombia’s indigenous 
communities live. Eight states in this 
region have launched inventory proj-
ects that are certain to enrich know- 
ledge of the country’s oral heritage.
Sergio Ocampo, 
in Bogota.
Poster edited for awareness campaign.

In 2005, UNESCO proclaimed palanquera culture 
a masterpiece of intangible heritage.
