enriched by several more archeo-
logical properties with the Bistun 
(Islamic Republic of Iran) bas-reliefs. 
Sculpted on an imposing cliff-face, 
the most famous of the bas-reliefs 
was executed in 521 BC at the order 
of the Achaemenid king, Darius I, to 
celebrate his victory against an en-
emy. An inscription in three languag-
es – Elamite, neo-Babylonian and 
old Persian – is engraved along the 
carved panels. It represents the only 
text by an Achaemenid king relating 
to an event that marked his reign. It 
is furthermore thanks to this inscrip-
tion that a British officer in the 19th 
century was able to decipher old 
Persian cuneiform script, in the same 
way that Champollion had solved the 
mystery of hieroglyphics with the Ro-
setta stone. 
Another site singled out: the his-
torical town of Harar, in Ethiopia. 
Perched at an altitude of more than 
1800 metres, it was once the gate-
way to Abyssinia. The fortified wall 
four metres high that still encircles 
the town testifies to the conflicts that 
began in the 16th century between 
the independent Muslim kingdom 
and the Christian emperors holding 
sway over the country. Although tra- 
ders’ caravans from the Abyssinian 
mountains or the Gulf of Aden tra- 
ding posts no longer come as before 
to sell coffee or ivory, Harar remains 
a noisy and vibrant town where com-
merce still holds an important place.
Recent heritage 
is highlighted
Following a noticeable trend in the 
last few years, the List is giving grea- 
ter recognition to recent heritage. An 
example is the Biscay Bridge, in the 
Spanish Basque country. The metal-
lic construction was made to join the 
opposite banks of the Nervión river, 
in Bilbao, without obstructing boat 
navigation. To meet the double chal-
lenge, the engineer Martín Alberto 
de Palacio y Elissague innovated: 
he agave cutters in Jalisco Mexico 
may not hear the news. It will proba-
bly have little impact on the harvest of 
the “piña”, used to make tequila. Yet 
on 12 July, the agave landscape and 
the old Tequila industrial installations 
were inscribed in UNESCO’s World 
Heritage List. 
This Mexican landscape is one 
of the 18 sites proclaimed by the 
World Heritage Committee, in Vilnius 
(Lithuania) from 8 to 16 July. The Con-
vention concerning the protection of 
the world cultural and natural heri-
tage, adopted in 1972 by UNESCO, 
now recognizes 830 properties of 
“outstanding universal value”. Given 
that there are 1500 sites on the waiting 
list, the number of the chosen may 
seem modest. In fact, it shows the 
Committee’s resolution in recent 
years to reduce inflation in the num-
ber of inscriptions.
The latest proclamation also reflects 
the general composition of the List, 
which has included a majority of cul-
tural sites from the beginning. There 
are actually 644 cultural properties 
versus 162 natural and 24 mixed 
(both natural and cultural). 
The lion’s share 
are cultural sites
This year too, the cultural sites 
bagged the lion’s share. The List is 
                         eighteen new sites have been just added to UNesco’s World Heritage list, 
                                bringing the total number of protected properties to 830. 
                       these sites not only fulfill scientific criteria necessary for inscription in the list, 
                                       they are also places that are alive and tell their own stories. 
                              Visit five sites which have just received UNesco’s coveted label.
World Heritage 
groWs ricHer
Agave plants, Jalisco (Mexico).

High on the side of a mountain, a bas-relief 
of Darius’ victory over ten rebel kings, 
Bisotun (Islamic Republic of Iran).

he designed the world’s first bridge 
equipped with a gondola. 
It was in the 19th century too that 
the Mexican valleys of Jalisco saw the 
development of distilleries for making 
Tequila, the incendiary beverage de-
picted by Hollywood. With the selec-
tion of the cultural landscape of the 
Jalisco valleys, the entire kingdom of 
agave is crowned. 
As the first legal instrument to pro-
tect both cultural and natural proper-
ties, the Convention also defends as-
sets such as the Great Barrier Reef 
(Australia) or the Everglades National 
Park (United States). This year, 2 
natural properties were added to the 
List. Among them is the Giant Panda 
reserve in Sichuan, China. The re-
serve is one of the few places in the 
world where these animals, 12 million 
years old, still live in the wild. Their 
situation is most precarious, however, 
with only 1500 individuals remaining 
of this endangered species.  
Agnès Bardon
