School iS likE a bicyclE   
if you don’t pedal, it topples
        an education expert, Michaela Zatreanu doesn’t fiercely advocate teaching school 
            in romani, despite being the author of the first textbooks published in this language 
in romania. She thinks instruction exclusively in romani would represent 
           a form of segregation and promotes schooling with a multicultural dimension.
Born into a Roma family in Maglavit, a 
village of 2500 inhabitants in south-
east Romania, Michaela Zatreanu 
learned Romanian by watching tele-
vision before starting school. Her 
mother language, Romani, spoken 
by the 70-odd Roma families in the 
village, was banned at school, even 
in the playground. “Under Nicolae 
Ceauscescu, the recognized minori-
ties were Hungarian, German, Serb 
and miscellaneous. We were miscel-
laneous,” she explains with a laugh. 
Today Zatreanu, 32, is a consultant at 
the Romanian Ministry of Education, 
after having worked for the European 
Roma and Travellers Forum (ERTF), 
an organization partnered by the Fishermen’s children in Kazakhstan.

Council of Europe and the European 
Union. “Working for a year within the 
Council of Europe! What an amazing 
experience!” she exclaims. 
She never imagined getting that 
far. Her dream when she was a little 
girl was to attend high school in 
Bucharest. She made it, thanks to her 
determination and her father’s moral 
support. “He was afraid he wouldn’t 
have enough money to pay for my 
schooling, but he said, ‘Go, we’ll 
see what happens’.” He was right. 
Michaela passed the exam for 
teachers’ training school. 
“That’s where I really saw the dif-
ference between the attitude of the 
teachers in my village and the teachers 
in the capital,” she explains. Unlike her 
brother, who finally dropped out at el-
ementary level because his teacher 
was beating him, Michaela has fond 
memories of school. But, she does 
recall, “When a pupil lost his pen or 
anything else, some teachers would 
make all the Roma children come up 
from the back rows (we were always 
in the back) and stand in line in front 
of the board and take off our boots. 
Imagine the shame – I wore socks 
that weren’t very presentable. I was 
very very embarrassed.” And she 
won’t soon forget the time her history 
teacher said in front of all the pupils 
in the playground that if this young 
Roma girl could be an excellent 
student, anybody could do good 
schoolwork. 
“It certainly wasn’t a compliment, but 
his intentions weren’t evil,” she says. 
“You have to keep in mind we Romas 
were inferior, in our own eyes as well 
as other people’s. Up to a point, I ac-
cepted this treatment. I didn’t find it 
terrible.” 
But Ms Zatreanu won’t generalize. 
“Not all teachers are racist and not all 
Roma suffer from discrimination. But 
some do. It can be explained through 
their own experience, their own moti-
vation.” She wants to remain optimis-
tic: “I won’t say all teachers now are 
extraordinary, but they are generally 
better prepared than before. Things 
today have changed a lot.” 
Undoubtedly. Proof enough to see 
her take the floor at international 
meetings held at UNESCO and 
to think of her grandmother who 
couldn’t even imagine leaving her vil-
lage, or her father, whose idea of a 
very good job was doing the cleaning 
in a hospital. “When you live in pov-
erty, perspectives are very limited,” 
says the woman who defied deeply-
rooted prejudice. 
One incident in the late 1990s did 
upset her. She was teaching in a 
state school in a district of Bucha-
rest with a large Roma population. 
“Another teacher came and banged 
on the door of my classroom. ‘Come 
out and make your little gypsies quiet 
down!’ she shouted. I told her it was 
out of the question for me to interrupt 
my class to stop a fight. The most 
shocked was the American journalist 
who was in the classroom just then, 
reporting a story about my Romani 
classes.”
What a lady!
What were these classes? After 
the fall of Ceausescu’s regime, the 
Ministry of Education embarked on 
extensive reforms, and Romani could 
be taught as a mother language in 
schools. The young teacher jumped 
at the chance. “It was outside the 
regular school curriculum. After an 
entire day of classes in Romanian, 
when the children were tired, I would 
take my guitar and sing them songs 
in Romani. They had fun and they 
learned at the same time, the little 
Roma and the little Romanians.” 
No real program, no real method…
so she decided to create them. That 
was how she became the author of 
the first Romani textbooks: “It wasn’t 
difficult for me, since it was my moth-
er language. And I had an excellent 
director of research. And linguists 
had already come up with a writing 
system based on the Latin alphabet.” 
Ms Zatreanu the pioneer decided to 
continue her studies: “I had a great 
teacher in high school. What a lady! 
She was my role model, and when 
you have a role model like that, you 
make progress,” she says. Michaela 
was accepted into the philology de-
partment at the university and chose 
English and Romani. Had Romani 
been taught at university during 
Ceausescu’s time? “No way!” she 
shoots back. 
How many Roma live in Romania? 
“Officially it’s 5,500, but accord-
ing to some of the Roma NGOs, 
it’s more than two million! I wonder 
if there aren’t even more than that. 
Half the Roma who make it don’t ad-
mit to being Roma, you know.”
Romania’s luck
There is genuine political will in Ro-
mania to improve education for the 
Roma. About five years ago, the gov-
ernment adopted a number of mea-
sures pertaining to different social 
issues: education, housing, health, 
employment. “It’s to be expected,” 
says Ms Zatreanu. “Romania has the 
luck to have more Roms than other 
countries” – she maintains her radi-
ant smile – “and therefore more edu-
cated Roma who could participate in 
instituting such a strategy. The largest 
number of Roma activists at the Euro-
pean level comes from Romania!” 
Michaela Zatreanu.

Does this strategy have real impact 
on daily life? “Of course, but it’s 
not always visible. We have a law 
against segregation and discrimina-
tion. Children’s learning conditions 
are regulated. It’s a good start. But 
policies aren’t enough to change the 
world overnight! If you want to solve 
the problem of discrimination, you 
have to work on people’s minds.” 
Ms Zatreanu proceeds to explain 
that teachers’ outlooks are changing, 
parents are more involved in the 
school program, curricula are no lon-
ger “monocultural”, and schools are 
becoming autonomous as power is 
decentralized, a novel process that is 
inspiring people - for decades used 
to working under state authority - to 
take responsibility for themselves. 
“School is like a bicycle. If you 
don’t pedal, it topples. The system 
has to move all the time. I always 
see change as positive,” she says. 
“For example, the fact that more and 
more Roma children in Europe no 
longer speak Romani is considered 
a real problem. But I say if a child 
is happy without speaking Romani, 
that’s positive!” 
In Ms Zatreanu’s view, it is the 
state’s duty to offer mother lan-
guage teaching to Roma children, or 
at least to have teachers who speak 
it. But, she maintains, “Setting up a 
school exclusively in Romani would 
be another form of discrimination.” 
As the mother of a four-year-old 
son, does she want her child taught 
in Romani? “For me, it’s important he 
have multicultural schooling, in what-
ever language. My son has already 
learned Romanian in kindergarten. 
With no effort, just by playing.”.
Jasmina Šopova 
and Ariane Bailey, 
UNESCO Courier
