                       Newly appointed assistant director-General for UNESCO’s Education Sector 
                         and former director of the Education for all (EFa) Global Monitoring Report
                                      published by UNESCO, Nicholas burnett explains his vision for education
                                                and UNESCO’s role in promoting it.
FRom education FoR all 
 to all oF education
Hagara Elementary in Port Moresby (Hanuabada). Papua New Guinea 
has over 800 different languages and children can begin their learning 
experience in their mother-tongue.

oeAs Director of the Global  
Monitoring Report, your focus 
has been on progress towards 
the Education for All (EFA) 
goals. What are you going  
o draw from that experience? 
I have a good knowledge of what 
has to be done both around the 
world, with our partner agencies and 
within the sector. But I don’t intend to 
only be the Assistant Director-Gener-
al (ADG) for Education for All. I intend 
to be the ADG for all of education. 
Within that, nothing is more impor-
tant, however, than EFA. 
What needs to be done  
with EFA? 
EFA goals… emerge as being in 
two categories: goals which people 
are paying attention to, such as pri-
mary school, gender parity and qual-
ity in education and goals which peo-
ple are not paying sufficient attention 
to such as, with some notable excep-
tions, literacy, early childhood and 
the needs of youth who don’t go to 
school or don’t learn while at school. I 
am particularly worried about the lack 
of movement on literacy. 
We need to make sure that we are 
well geared up to promote the areas 
where we’re not moving through ad-
vocacy and through making the tech-
nical competencies available where 
they are needed.
What other areas need  
particular attention?
Secondary education for example, 
for which, because of the relative 
success at the primary level, there is 
Interview by Ariane Bailey and Sue Williams (UNESCO)
an enormous demand coming from 
all over the world. We have to see 
what we need to do to help support 
that. It can be partially within the EFA 
framework through gender parity but 
it is much more. 
One of the issues globalisation is 
raising in almost every country is: 
what sort of specific skills do people 
need, what is the balance between 
specific and general skills? We 
need to help countries come to their 
own answers. Vocational skills and 
training is, of course, an area of the 
International Labour Organization 
(ILO) activity as well as UNESCO 
and I intend to explore our relation-
ship with ILO. 
International finance is a third area 
that needs attention. There are 
two big problems: first, there is not 
enough and second, it is not nec-

essarily going to the right countries 
and the right sub-sectors of educa-
tion. Although UNESCO is not an 
aid agency, it is a major voice and 
has a major advocacy role to play, to 
constructively engage with some of 
the donors. Too much of some coun-
tries’ bilateral aid goes to foreign 
students attending their universities 
and clearly insufficient resources 
are going to Africa. Moreover, we’re 
facing a worrying situation: aid for 
basic education has increased pro-
gressively until 2004 and dropped 
in 2005. Preliminary data for 2006 
also indicate that promises aren’t 
being met but that doesn’t mean 
they aren’t being met by some of the 
donors.
How can we change  
this tendency?
There is a lot of interest and good-
will among donors in how they 
could support UNESCO more di-
rectly. The donors don’t want us to 
fail; they want us to succeed: what 
we have to figure out is ways to 
work with them as partners so we 
succeed and they succeed as well. 
I’m looking to reinforce several 
partnerships for direct collabora-
tion with OECD and with EFA part-
ners - World Bank, United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), 
UNICEF, United Nations Popula-
tion Fund - but also with the Fast 
Track Initiative (FTI). UNESCO has 
just become a more formal mem-
ber of FTI, and there is enormous 
scope for collaboration. But its na-
ture depends on what we are trying 
to do: part of it is about influencing 
where the aid goes and for this the 
links with the World Bank and the 
FTI are very important. 
Our credibility also has to do with 
knowledge and knowledge man-
agement. UNESCO should be the 
premier source of knowledge about 
education in the world... Knowledge 
is one of the key areas at UNESCO 
that we need partly to rebuild and 
partly make more visible. I’ve been 
surprised at how much knowledge 
there is at UNESCO. The problem 
is getting access to it. 
We have to separate knowledge 
production and generation, and 
knowledge management where we 
would like to take advantage of 
knowledge generation by others as 
well as by us. 
What about  
private partnerships? 
I want to look for ways to work ef-
fectively with the private sector. For 
example, we need to do more work 
on private schools. In countries like 
Haiti education is delivered through 
the private sector as in much of Latin 
America. We should take a pragmatic 
approach towards private education 
and play an important role in helping 
governments regulate it. Regulation 
doesn’t have to be seen as control to 
dampen down but positive regulation 
to align services delivered by the pri-
vate sector with public goals. 
Resources for UNESCO  
are perhaps the first obstacle 
that leaps up? 
There are two types of resources, 
financial and human; despite the very 
tight budgetary constraints, I don’t 
believe that resources will ultimately 
be a problem. There is an enormous 
amount of money around to support 
education development in develop-
ing countries and I believe that we 
can access it if we deploy our own 
human resources properly. 
We have many capable people and 
we have good relationships with our 
Member States. We have to improve 
the way we work together.
Nicholas Burnett.

A child working in a village above Chang Mai (Karen Village), Thailand.
