I
rather they represent the culmina-
tion of a thousand-year maturing 
process, a process which to a large 
extent was carried forward by the 
written word. Behind this humanistic 
tradition were flesh and blood indi-
viduals who, at certain times of their 
lives, sat down to think and write – 
and they thought on behalf of the 
whole of humanity.
Towards a Universal 
Declaration of Human 
Obligations
The question that faces us at the start 
of a new millennium is how long we 
can go on talking about rights without 
simultaneously focusing on the indi-
vidual’s obligations. Maybe we need 
a new universal declaration. Perhaps 
the time is ripe for a Universal 
Declaration of Human Obligations. It 
is simply no longer meaningful to talk 
about rights without simultaneously 
stressing the individual state’s or per-
son’s obligations. 
An important bedrock of all ethics 
has been “the golden rule:” Do unto 
others as you would have them do 
unto you. Immanuel Kant defined this 
reciprocal principle by pointing out 
that the right action is the one we 
would want everyone to perform in a 
similar situation. Two hundred years 
after Kant’s death we have just about 
begun to get used to the idea that 
the reciprocal principle must also ap-
ply between rich and poor countries. 
In addition, it must include the rela-
tionship between the generations. 
The question is whether we would 
have wanted previous generations 
to cut down more forests and rain 
forests. Would we have preferred 
it if our ancestors had exterminated 
even more plant and animal species? 
If not, we are duty bound to preserve 
biological diversity. We cannot even 
be sure that Kant would have toler-
ated our high consumption of non-
renewable energy sources. We must 
n his later years the German phi-
losopher Immanuel Kant pointed 
out that it was a necessary moral 
imperative for every country to join 
together in a “league of nations” 
whose job would be to ensure their 
peaceful co-existence. As such, this 
German philosopher would seem 
to have first fathered the idea of the 
United Nations. 
About 200 years later we were able 
to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary 
of the UN’s Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. And there was good 
reason to celebrate this milestone, 
as human rights still need to be pro-
tected against infringements and 
brutal violations. The only difference 
now is that, for more than fifty years, 
we have had an institution and an 
instrument with which to defend 
these rights. 
Perhaps the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights represents the 
greatest triumph of philosophy so 
far. For human rights were not be-
stowed on us by higher powers, nor 
were they plucked from thin air, but 
                             As pollution and climate change threaten human survival on our planet, 
                                      norwegian philosopher Jostein Gaarder –the internationally celebrate
                                         author of “Sophie’s World” – argues that philosophy can help us 
                                                  defuse the time bomb that is ticking away that is ticking away.
Jostein Gaarder   
A user’s mAnuAl  
for our plAnet  
Jostein Gaarder (Norway).

first make sure that we would have 
wished our ancestors to burn the 
same amount of coal and oil per head 
as we do. 
We are the first generation to affect 
the climate on earth – and perhaps 
the last that won’t have to pay the 
price for it.
We are primates
It has been said that the problem with 
Spaceship Earth is that it didn’t come 
with instructions. But in that case, 
why don’t we get on and write an 
instruction manual? For that we will 
need philosophy!
We are often told that ideologies are 
dead. But isn’t consumerism also an 
ideology? And is this really the only 
possible model? 
One important question for phi-
losophy at the beginning of the third 
millennium must be: what shift in 
consciousness do we need? What is a 
sustainable wisdom? Which qualities 
of life are the most important? Which 
values are the true values? What is 
the good life? And importantly: what 
kind of mobilisation is possible in the 
global village? 
Today, many of us understand the 
challenges facing the planet. But we 
feel paralysed by political and eco-
nomic systems. Politicians, too, have 
a far greater insight than might appear 
from their practice. And this is the par-
adox: we have sufficient insight – and 
we know that time is short – but we 
aren’t able to turn things round before 
it will be too late. Philosophy will have 
to play a decisive part if we are to suc-
ceed in negotiating the sea change 
necessary for our survival. In the same 
way that philosophers and authors 
have constituted an avant-garde in 
the fight for human rights, so they may 
form a vanguard in the struggle for hu-
man obligations.
According to an old parable a frog 
that is dropped into boiling water will 
immediately jump out again and so 
save its skin. But if the frog is placed 
in a pan of cold water that is gradu-
ally brought to boiling point, it will be 
unaware of the danger and be boiled 
to death. 
Is our generation like that frog? Is 
modern philosophy such a frog? We 
may not know, but it really is down to 
us to decide. We can’t count on any 
outside help. We’re not likely to be 
saved in the final second before boil-
ing point – either from outer space or 
by some form of supernatural inter-
vention. 
Human beings are largely social crea-
tures. We are in addition pretty self-
centred and vain. But we can’t contin-
ue only to relate to each other. We also 
belong to the earth we live on. That, 
too, is a significant part of our identity. 
To a large extent we modern human 
beings have been shaped by our cul-
tural history, by the actual civilisation 
that has nurtured us. We say that we 
have a cultural heritage. But we have 
also been formed by the biological his-
tory of the planet. We also pass on a 
genetic inheritance. We are primates. 
We are vertebrates. 
It took several billion years to cre-
ate us. But will we survive the third 
millennium? 
Human beings are possibly the only 
living creatures in the universe with a 
universal consciousness. And so our 
responsibility to preserve the living 
environment of this planet is not only 
global but cosmic. 
Philosophy is nothing less than a 
celebration of mankind’s conscious-
ness. So shouldn’t a philosopher be 
the first to defend human conscious-
ness against annihilation?
Dr Jostein Gaarder, 
Norwegian philosopher
Preserving the biological diversity is a duty.

The parable of the frog.
