                 “islamizing” modernity instead of modernizing islam – preposterous! worries 
                                 Professor mohammed Arkoun. A refuge in poor countries, 
                  a rejection of “tele-techno-scientific reasoning” in rich countries, religiosity 
                     is spreading in the world at the expense of humanist values and philosophical thinking.
MohaMMed arKoun : 
PhilosoPhy and religion,  
between exchange and tension

Mohammed Arkoun (Algeria).
Philosophical thought and religious 
thought have a long history in com-
mon in the Mediterranean world. 
Since they emerged respectively 
in Greece and in the Middle East, 
they have affronted, confronted 
and enriched each other. The ex-
changes and tensions between 
them continue to this day, but there 
are nonetheless signs of exhaustion 
versus the triumphant free market 
and computer civilization. 
Concerning exchange, the two 
great philosophical bodies of 
knowledge, the Platonic and the 
Aristotelian, were key for the con-
struction of Jewish, Christian and 
Islamic theologies, beginning with 
the circulation of the Septuagint 
(the Greek version of the Old Tes-
tament) established between 250-
130 B.C. in Alexandrian Judaism 

and the transmission in Greek of 
the Gospels deemed authentic by 
the Christian church. 
And as far as tension between 
philosophical reasoning and theo-
logical reasoning, it also marked the 
three currents of thought – Jewish, 
Christian and Islamic – as illustra- 
ted in the works of Averroes (1126-
1198), Maimonides (1135-1204) 
and Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274). 
In Islam, the rise of the brother-
hoods beginning in the 13th cen-
tury brought about a regression of 
theological reasoning and the elimi-
nation of the Greek philosophical 
culture. The latter is still struggling 
to get “reacclimatized”, even at 
university level. In Latin and Chris-
tian Europe, it was philosophy that 
gained ground to the point of mar-
ginalizing theology when the revo-
lution of the Enlightenment came 
about, and even more after the sep-
aration of church and secular state. 
In Christianity, theological thought 
is increasingly forced to follow in the 
wake of human and social sciences. 
This is not the case with Islam, 
where the apologetic and funda-
mentalist currents reject colonial 
and Western sciences as destruc-
tive forces against Islamic tradition. 
To the point that they espouse the 
idea of Islamizing modernity rather 
than modernizing Islam.
Marginalization  
of thought
The multiple revolutions introduced 
by computers and population 
growth in poor countries have over-
turned what sociologists call the 
social frameworks of thought and 
knowledge. Considerable gaps 
continue to widen between rich 
countries and countries left at the 
mercy of the negative side-effects 
of the free market and consumer-
ism. 
In countries under the boot of 
authoritarian, not to say rogue, re-
gimes, the return of traditional re-
ligion can be interpreted as the 
quest for refuge, social protection 
and moral and psychological refer-
ence points. Religion is a refuge, 
including for the opposition, a 
springboard to satisfying social and 
political ambition. The result is de-
terioration of spiritual values, which 
are deprived of critical cultural and 
intellectual support. 
But we can see that populist and 
superstitious religion is on the rise 
even in the richest societies, such as 
the United States. The undisputed 
victory of “tele-techno-scientific” 
reasoning reinforces the expansion 
of religiosity in rich and super-de-
veloped countries, and the margin-
alization of thought and philosophi-
cal culture. 
Recently-published statistics on 
the distribution of baccalaureate 
degrees in France show that 52% 
of the students who earned de-
grees in 2007 came from scientific 
curricula, and only 16% from literary 
education. France and Italy are the 
only two countries I know of where 
philosophy is taught in high school. 
There is as much disinterest for this 
discipline as there is for history, 
another key discipline in what 
used to be called the humanities, 
referring to culture and humanist 
comportment. According to other 
statistics from countries that are try-
ing to develop, many of the young 
people involved in Islamist com-
bat groups have scientific back-
grounds. Everywhere the state en-
courages this orientation to promote 
economic development and fight 
against unemployment.
A widening gap
As a historian of Islamic thought, 
I can testify that between 1970 
and 2000, I could measure from 
year to year at the Sorbonne the 
increasing impoverishment of his-
torical knowledge and historical, 
sociological and anthropological 
reasoning. I also noted an almost 
total lack of everything that nou- 
rishes epistemological criticism in 
the whole of scientific production. 
When this criticism does manifest 
itself, it is too technical for readers 
to feel involved. These are all fac-
tors accelerating the primacy of 
“tele-techno-scientific” education 
and the victory of the knowledge 
of experts versus humanist con-
cerns that are inseparable from 
philosophical disquiet. 
It is true that most professionals 
in philosophy don’t offer writing 
that is easily accessible to the 
general public. Those who do are 
treated condescendingly by the 
guardians of philosophical gravi-
tas. The conferences in which 
I’ve taken part at UNESCO and 
elsewhere have led me to feeling 
certain that the gap between the 
general public’s expectations and 
innovative philosophical produc-
tion is more likely to get wider than 
narrower in the near future. This 
observation applies just as much 
to pragmatic cultures as it does 
to societies that are the victims of 
the rise of ritualistic religions with 
populist tendencies.
Dr Mohammed Arkoun, 
(Algeria), historian of Islamic 
thought, teaches at the Sorbonne 
Nouvelle University in Paris.
The victory of “tele-techno-scientific” reasoning.
