poor and developing countries. The 
disastrous economic effect is seen 
from the humble levels – at an au-
tomobile assembly plant in South 
Africa, research found that many 
workers on the line could follow 
only spoken orders, unable to read 
any written notification. At the level 
of higher education for the profes-
sions, universities are faced with 
the problem of students ostensibly 
qualified for entry who do not have 
the vocabulary or skilled use of the 
written word necessarily assumed 
for university courses. The shortage 
of suitably competent candidates 
for positions essential in develop-
ment of governance, social services, 
industry and commerce, is thus evi-
dent. President Mbeki recently said 
that, in order to serve the needs of 
South Africa’s fast-growing econo-
my – the leading one on the African 
continent in terms of resources and 
infrastructure – he believes we shall 
have to import qualified individuals 
from other countries to fill the va-
cancies, while assisting to raise the 
capabilities of South Africans to ful-
Nadine Gordimer is committed to UNESCO’s 
cause in its fight against illiteracy.

n the beginning was the Word. The 
Word that was Creation. Its transfor-
mation into the written word came 
to us when it was first scratched as 
a hieroglyph or ideogram on a stone 
or traced on papyrus, and when it 
travelled from parchment to print in 
Gutenberg. That was the next gen-
esis: of literacy. It was and is the mi-
raculous ability that humans alone 
possess within the miracle of cre-
ation (we have devised the means 
to take to the air). 
Our new millennium, stated as 
dedicated to defining and uphold-
ing human rights, surely should list 
literacy as an inalienable one? 
Yet UNESCO reports that over 
700 million adults in our era can-
not read or write and more than 
72 million children do not go to 
school, deprived of their rightful 
heritage, literacy. In South Africa, 
where I write these words, illiteracy 
is almost 50% in certain rural areas. 
What are the reasons, world-wide 
or nearer wherever one’s home may 
be? Poverty and lack of educational 
facilities are the obvious ones in 
NadiNe Gordimer: 
The imaGe aNd The Word
               literacy is an inalienable human right, says Nadine Gordimer, 
     1991 Nobel Prize for literature. but, according to the South African novelist, 
                    being able to read a billboard doesn’t mean one is literate.
fill such positions, particularly in in-
dustry. An upgraded version of the 
adage, “each-one-teach-one”.
But we come back to the abso-
lute. It shouldn’t need to be stated, 
but has to be, it seems. Literacy is 
the basis of all learning. Even if one 
goes on to the differently profound 
numero-ideogrammatic knowledg-
es of science. 
And, on the way back to the 
source that is the written word, 
we arrive at a presently prevalent 
intermediate condition of literacy: 
semi-literacy. This is no doubt ex-
acerbated in multilingual countries 
where, as a result of long coloniza-
tion, a foreign language became 
and remains a lingua franca, the Philae temples on the Island of Agilkia.

second language, not the mother 
tongue, the natal Word, of the in-
habitant. One would accept that 
you are unlikely to be able to read 
and write the lingua franca as confi-
dently, precisely, as, once master of 
the alphabet, you surely could read 
and write your own. But a distin-
guished writer and academic, Pro-
fessor Es’kia Mphahlele, tells me 
that black South Africans emerge 
from their schooling semi-literate 
in the reading and writing of their 
own mother tongues, just as white 
South Africans and those of other 
ethno-linguistic backgrounds are 
semi-literate in theirs. To be able to 
read the legend on a billboard and 
the bubble-enclosed dialogue of 
Spacemen in a comic book, while 
unable to understand the vocabu-
lary of a poem or follow in prose 
literature the meaningful variations 
of syntax, the use of words in ways 
that open up new depths of self-
comprehension – that is not literacy. 
It is not what every individual should 
have by human right. 
The developing countries, although 
with more reasons for producing 
only the halfway to literacy, are not 
alone in this cultural state. Colleges 
in the USA report the same result of 
their educational system, reflection 
of current cultural values of their 
society. In Britain there is the same 
dismay at young men and women, 
born and educated in the country 
NadiNe Gordimer: The imaGe aNd The Word
of the birth of the English language, 
who cannot read or write using the 
great resources of their mother 
tongue. 
So, while poverty and lack of edu-
cational opportunity are responsible 
for the great void in our world that is 
illiteracy, this tragic situation is not 
the prime cause, let alone the justifi-
cation for the widespread phenom-
enon of semi-literacy.
The fact is that we are conjoined, all 
countries long developed or strug-
gling to develop across the abyss 
between rich nations and poor, un-
der threat of the Image against the 
Written Word. From the first third 
of the 20th Century the image has 
been challenging the power of the 
written word as the stimulation of 
the imagination, the opening of hu-
man receptivity. The bedtime story 
of middle class childhood has been 
replaced by the hour in front of the 
TV screen; in shack settlements all 
over the poor countries of the globe 
the TV aerial signifies the battery-
run screen where no book is to be 
found. School and community librar-
ies don’t exist in villages and towns 
where video cassettes are for hire. 
Yes, TV images are accompanied 
by the spoken word, sometimes 
by text, but it is the picture that de-
cides how secondary the Word’s 
role shall be. 
The American writer, William Gass, 
defines best the Written Word, in its 
home, the book: ‘We shall not un-
derstand what a book is, and why 
a book has the value many persons 
have… If we forget how important 
to it is its body, the building that 
has been built to hold its lines of 
language safely together… Words 
on a screen have virtual qualities, 
to be sure…but they have no ma-
teriality, they are only shadows, and 
when the light shifts they’ll be gone. 
Off the screen they do not exist as 
words. They do not wait to be re-
seen, reread; they only wait to be 
remade, relit.’ 
Yes, the Image of text, of the Word, 
disappears off the screen; to recall 
it, along with the other visuals, you 
have to have an apparatus, a cell, a 
battery, access to an electric power 
connection. The book needs none 
of these. Simply held in the hand 
it can be read, turned to again and 
again, on a bus, in the subway, in 
the bath, on a mountain top, in a 
queue. 
This is no fuddy-duddy turning 
away from progress. The vast ad-
vances in communications tech-
nology are an information revolu-
tion that has great possibilities for 
social development if well used, 
which means made economically 
available to the millions in the world 
whose lives will otherwise be bull-
dozed by the financial oligarchy of 
globalization. 
But information does not, it cannot, 
ever replace, outmoded illumina-
tion – searching knowledge of the 
human intellect and spirit that, all 
readers know, comes in communi-
cation with the Word in its infinitely 
portable, available home between 
hard or paperback covers. 
First it became the book of the movie. 
Now it is the book of the website. 
Don’t let it happen. 
Nadine Gordimer, 
South African novelist, 
Nobel Prize for Literature 1991
(Extract from The Alphabet of Hope: Writers 
for Literacy, UNESCO)
˝The bedtime story of middleclass childhood has been replaced by the hour in front of the 
TV screen ,̋ says Nadine Gordimer.
