wateR, an obvious pRioRity
                  Nearly one person out of five in the world has no access to drinking water. 
            hardly surprising that water is UNESCO’s main priority. To face this challenge,
              the Organization emphasizes education and increased knowledge 
                      about this key resource. another UNESCO priority issue related to water 
                              is preventing and reducing the impact of tsunamis.
A qanat in Iran. Qanats spread as far as Mexico in the West  
and China in the East.

Contrary to popular belief, there 
is enough water on the planet for 
everybody - but on the condition 
the supply is managed wisely. As it 
stands, 1.1 billion people still have 
insufficient access to drinking wa-
ter, according to the 2006 United 
Nations World Water Development 
Report (WWDR). And halving 
the percentage of the population 
without access to water by 2015, 
as specified in the United Nations 
Millennium Goals, will be a major 
challenge. Estimates say this goal 
will not be reached in Sub-Saharan 
Africa before 2075. 
“Water has been the main priority 
of UNESCO’s Natural Sciences 
sector for the last six years,” says 
Walter Erdelen, Assistant Director-
General for Natural Sciences. A di-
rect consequence: the budget allo-
cated to water-related programmes 
has increased by 40% since 
2001. “The activities conducted by 
UNESCO in the domain of fresh-
water are by far the most extensive 
within the United Nations system. 
We employ about 200 people,” 
says Andràs Szollosi-Nagy, Direc-
tor of the Division of Water Scienc-
es at UNESCO. 
Essential for assuring effective 
distribution of resources, wise wa-
ter management is all the more cru-
cial in regions affected by drought 
or desertification. “There will always 
be enough water for everyone, but 
humans must realize the impor-
tance of good governance for this 
precious resource,” stresses Szol-
losi-Nagy.
Investing  
in the future
To manage water more wisely, we 
need sound knowledge of existing 
resources. This is why UNESCO 
contributes to the United Nations 
World Water Development Report 
(WWDR), published every three 
years (next edition in 2009). In ad-
dition, 12 water centres have been 
established in different countries 
around the world to increase knowl-
edge about this resource. Centres 
specialized in key areas such as 
managing water in urban settings, 
water and climate change, and wa-
ter laws and policies are adding to 
research and reframing the water 
issue within a wider cultural context. 

The International Centre on Qa-
nats and Historic Hydraulic Struc-
tures (ICQHHS) in Yazd (Iran), for 
instance, conducts research on 
these traditional underground irri-
gation systems. 
The goal is to revive the ancestral 
technique in regions where modern 
solutions, which use up a lot of wa-
ter, have failed. Another goal is to 
promote systems that further not 
only irrigation but also communica-
tion among people and cultures. 
“Qanats, which appeared in Iran al-
most 3000 years ago, spread as far 
as Mexico in the West and China 
in the East,” explains Szollosi-Nagy.
Prevent  
the worst
Another key issue for the Sciences 
sector: disaster mitigation, particu-
larly tsunamis. Founded in the mid-
1960s in the Pacific Ocean, the 
tsunami early warning system has 
since made considerable progress. 
With the help of extra budgetary 
funding that poured in after the 
December 2004 tsunami, the pro-
visional alert system was deployed 
in the Indian Ocean. Sweden - 10% 
of its population annually chooses 
Thailand as a holiday destination - 
donated a substantial amount. In 
coming years, the Intergovernmen-
tal Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) plans to expand the alert sys-
tem to the North Atlantic, the Medi-
terranean and the Caribbean. 
Baan Khem, Phang Nga province, one of the hardest hit villages 
during the tsunami of 26 December 2004.
The existing tsunami warning sys-
tem, implemented in the Pacific 
Ocean in the 1960s and in the In-
dian Ocean in 2006, uses 35 deep-
ocean pressure sensors. These de-
vices, installed at a depth of 1000 
to 4000 meters, detect seismic ac-
tivity leading to a tsunami and send 
an alert. Only 88 are needed to 
make the system global. But funds 
are lacking for such a system to 
be deployed. Just 1.2% of UNES-
CO’s budget is currently allocated 
to IOC activities. 
To avert future disasters, better 
coordination between the various 
coastal countries is another cru-
cial requirement. “Technically, the 
warning system in the North Atlan-
tic, Mediterranean and Caribbean 
will certainly be in place by 2009. 
But will the alert signal reach the 
populations concerned? Highly 
unlikely! Even if you have a tele-
phone, you still need to know the 
number to call the fire depart-
ment!” explains Patricio Bernal, 
IOC Executive Secretary. 
More funds, better understand-
ing between coastal countries 
– additional conditions for suc-
cessfully implementing a global 
tsunami warning system include 
revising maritime legislation, 
teaching populations about res-
cue techniques and creating 
evacuation infrastructure.
Katerina Markelova 
and Agnès Bardon 
(UNESCO)

The Aral sea is drying up. Studies, tests, measurements of the level,  
the salinity of water are done by the Institute of Geography.
