         Cultural diversity and dialogue between cultures are on the list of UNESCO’s 
          top priorities. The Organization now has three conventions that protect humanity’s
               cultural heritage. The challenge lies in applying them.
cultuRes tRavel 
 with humanity
Safeguarding and promoting cul-
tural diversity and its corollary, dia-
logue between cultures, make up a 
UNESCO priority. The Organization 
spent years identifying and making 
an inventory of cultural property 
around the world before putting for-
ward in 1972 the Convention con-
cerning the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage. It 
was an important phase, necessary 
but not sufficient. Because the con-
cept reflected rather heavily the Eu-
ropean perspective, a large portion 
of the world whose cultural wealth 
did not rest on tangible heritage felt 
excluded. 
In the years since 2000, the con-
cept of culture was expanded in the 
Organization’s texts. The UNESCO 
Universal Declaration on Cultural 
Diversity (2001) defined it as “the 
set of distinctive spiritual, material, 
intellectual and emotional features 
of society or a social group that en-
compasses, in addition to art and 
literature, lifestyles, ways of living 
together, value systems, traditions 
and beliefs.” 
Two new texts emerged: the Con-
vention for the Safeguarding of the 
Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003), 
followed by the Convention on the 
Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions 
(2005). “With these instruments, 
we practically completed the cons= 
truction of the legal structure to 
protect cultural property,” explains 
Françoise Rivière, Assistant Direc-
tor-General for Culture. “UNESCO 
today protects cultures in all their 
forms: tangible, intangible and ob-
jects (museum pieces, for instance, 
or shipwrecks protected by the 
Convention for the Protection of 
the Underwater Cultural Heritage). 
From now on, the challenge lies 
in the application of the conven-
tions. Most people think a conven-
tion’s entry into force is the end of 
the process when on the contrary 
that’s where it all starts, once the 
normative base exists.”
The essence of greater 
harmony
Cultural diversity was recognized 
as “common heritage of humanity” 
in the 2001 Universal Declaration. 
The World Heritage sites testify to 
this, both through places (from Ven-
ice, Italy to Timbuktu, Mali and Eas-
ter Island, Chile) and down through 
time (from the archaeological sites 
of the Côa Valley, Portugal, to 
Brasilia). Further testimony comes 
from the masterpieces of the oral 
and intangible heritage of humanity, 
as diverse as Bolivian Kallawaya rit-
uals, Japanese Ningyo Johruri Bun-
raku puppet theatre, Vanuatu sand 
drawings, Georgian polyphonic 
singing, and the Gule Wamkulu 
dance with masks practiced in Ma-
lawi, Zambia and Mozambique. 
Diversity is both an established 
fact and a value. Its recognition as a 
factor in social cohesion and human 
development, essential for greater 
harmony in intellectual, emotional, 
moral and spiritual life, is at the 
heart of UNESCO’s concerns.
Today’s tradition,  
yesterday’s novelty
Nonetheless, the decision to safe-
guard diversity in the face of homog-
enization and the threat of extinction 
is not synonymous with a vision of 
culture as unchangeable, isolated 
and defensive. All cultures are dy-
namic; they evolve with time, through 
contact with other cultures – some-
times in the form of exchange, other 
times conflict. Diversity always in-
volves a degree of tension. Cultures 
are not sedentary; they’re nomadic, 
they travel with humanity. Not stat-
ic but fluctuating, they grow and 
change. Today’s tradition is yester-
The felt bowler hat, typical of 19th century Europe, 
is now typical of Aymara Indians in the Andes.

day’s novelty. The felt bowler hat, typical 
of 19th century Europe, is now typical 
of Aymara Indians in the Andes. This is 
why diversity and dialogue have a rela-
tionship of reciprocity. Cultural heritage 
is not a static legacy that need only be 
safeguarded, like a museum piece, but 
instead the ground for permanent and 
sometimes tense dialogue, among all 
its forms of expression. 
The concept of culture has indeed 
changed over time, but the safe-
guarding of cultural diversity has 
been a priority for UNESCO since 
its foundation, as shown in its Con-
stitution, in which the Organization 
pledges to help preserve “the inde-
pendence, integrity and fruitful diver-
sity of the cultures and educational 
systems of the States members”.  n
Carlos Tello Díaz 
(UNESCO)Minaret and interior courtyard of the Mosque 
of Sankare, Timbuctu, Mali.
