woo-taK Kee :  
towArds A philosophy of universAlity
               it is the philosopher’s task to “recover humanity” believes 
                  south-Korean philosopher woo-tak Kee who recommends a world philosophy 
                     for a world community. A philosophy that should play an important part 
                                 in the universality within cultural diversity.
Woo-Tak Kee (Republic of Korea).

rd n the world’s spiritual history, 
what era could have made philoso-
phers agonize as much over the is-
sue of human nature as the current 
one? Various crimes caused by the 
contempt of human lives through-
out the world - the 9/11 terrors of 
2001, recent massacre at Virginia 
Tech, threats from nuclear weap-
ons and the almost daily occur-
rences of carnages in Iraq – are 
calamities brought upon humans 
by other humans. They should have 
been inconceivable in the civilized 
society of the 21st century. In the 
face of these tragedies, philoso-
phers must provide a solution. Life, 

whether it is your own or another’s, 
is equally precious. Manslaughter 
is the worst case of obliterating 
human nature and an extreme re-
jection of peace. 
We can’t help but search for the 
cause of this destruction of hu-
manity in the innate duplicity of hu-
man nature. This duplicity while it 
gives humans an unflagging will for 
the good, also gives way to their 
weakness when tempted to seek 
“the radical evil” tenaciously lurk-
ing within human nature. There-
fore, there can be few, if any, ob-
jections to the assertion that a key 
proposition of this era should be 
the “recovery of human nature.” 
Confucius said: “What you do not 
want done to yourself, do not do to 
others.” And Immanuel Kant said: 
“Always recognize that human in-
dividuals are ends, and do not use 
them as means to your end.” Ac-
cording to these teachings human 
nature is noble and subject to rev-
erence.
Recovering  
humanity
The secret in the recovery of hu-
man nature is evasive, as humanity 
stands somewhere between divinity 
(morality) and bestiality. It is thus 
an important task of today’s men 
and women to cast away their 
bestial (carnal) inclinations elevate 
themselves to moral characters 
and maintain balanced persona- 
lities by encouraging reflection on 
human nature. 
The philosophy of “recovering 
humanity” through nurturing mo-
rality should lead toward the road 
to global peace. Should the logic 
of a “World Citizens’ Community” 
that Kant advocated in “Perpetual 
Peace” about 200 years ago re-
main just an ideal, an eternal dream? 
There is a limit to the roles that reli-
gion and politics can play in resol- 
ving conflicts among human cultures. 
So it’s the philosophers’ role to pro-
vide solutions. They should elabo-
rate a philosophy of universality 
for global villagers to prevent war 
and to serve as the basis for indivi- 
duals’ rights. 
Therefore, the creation of world 
philosophy is more urgent than any-
thing else. It implies first of all break-
ing the wall between Eastern and 
Western philosophical traditions 
and facilitating mutual understand-
ing and communication between 
the two heterogeneous cultures. To 
give shape to “World Philosophy”, a 
proper fusion of Western and East-
ern values is necessary. In other 
words, if Western values stand for 
liberalism and individualism, Eastern 
values are closer to collectivism and 
communalism. Still, this dichotomic 
analysis can never be absolute, as 
Western values contain elements 
of Eastern values and there can be 
Western characteristics, too, within 
the components of Eastern values.
Against philosophical 
exclusivity
To resolve such cultural conflicts, 
it is first necessary to form a pan-
Asian philosophy as the premise 
for establishing World Philoso-
phy, and for this purpose, I think 
it very important for the three East 
Asian nations of China, Japan and 
Korea to pursue the integration of a 
common cultural sphere and jointly 
examine how to evaluate modern 
values contained in the heritage of 
Confucian culture, as represented 
by the teachings of Confucius and 
Mencius. 
The discussion of the Universal-
ity of Philosophy is based on the 
global village theory to form a 
global community. The progress in 
today’s information and transporta-
tion technology, and the sweeping 
wave of globalization have made 
the fences of nationalism and re-
gionalism not tenable any longer. 
Philosophy must adapt to the new 
information society and the pursuit 
of cultural globalization and univer-
sality should emerge as the grand 
proposition that brings together 
today’s philosophies, a prerequi-
site for the birth of the Universality 
of Philosophy. 
The role of the Universality of 
Philosophy will be to seek, above 
all, harmony and unity that enable 
humans to escape from cultural 
antagonism and conflicts as well 
as to avoid philosophical, religious 
and cultural exclusiveness in their 
search of universality amid cultural 
diversity.
Dr Woo-Tak Kee, 
Professor at the Hong-Ik University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Philosophy must recover humanity.
Humanity stands somewhere  
between divinity and bestiality.
