                       Philosophy cannot make people honest, believes british Professor Peter J. King,
                               author of 100 Philosophers: a guide to the greatest thinkers of humanity. 
                                 but it gives us the tools to defend ourselves against those 
                                      who are neither benevolent nor truthful …who wish to manipulate us.
Peter J. KinG   
philosophy AgAinst mAnipulAtion
Peter J. King (United Kingdom).

ghe term “philosophy” is used in a 
wide variety of ways, even in aca-
demic contexts; in what follows I 
shall use it to refer to a particular 
kind of approach to questions, con-
cepts, problems, and issues. As I 
understand it, then, philosophy is 
an activity, a process not a product; 
it aims at clear, impartial analysis 
and argument. Its subject matter is 
extremely varied, but in general it 
deals with matters at a higher level 
of abstraction and generality than 
other disciplines. Thus while, for 
example, a physical scientist makes 
observations, devises experiments, 
develops theories, etc., the phi-
losopher of science tackles such 
matters as the analysis and exami-
nation of the nature of observation 
and theory and the relationship be-
tween them, the role of experimen-
tation, and the very nature of the 
scientific enterprise. 
But if philosophy is simply a matter 
of thinking clearly and without bias, 
practitioners of other disciplines 
are surely justified in protesting 
that they are as able to do that as 
is the philosopher. One response is 
that indeed they are — but having 
the ability is one thing, having the 
time and the inclination is another. 
Philosophical education is in large 
part a training in patience, rigour, 
and thoroughness; the philosopher 
must be prepared to take great and 
often lengthy pains to work through 
complex analyses of concepts and 
arguments — and most people have 
neither the time nor the tempera-
ment to do that. Another response 
is that, while other disciplines typi-
cally involve techniques of thought 
and analysis specific to a certain 
subject matter or goal, as well, of 
course, as a mass of knowledge of 
facts, theories, practical skills, etc., 
philosophy is wholly general, aiming 
to prepare its practitioners to inves-
tigate anything.
Of course, neither philosophical 
ability nor the willingness to use it 
are confined to professional philo- 
sophers; indeed, when non-profes-
sionals philosophise they are quite 
capable of producing results at 
least as important as those of their 
professional counterparts. 
Thinking is one thing, 
thinking clearly quite 
another
In fact professional philosophers, as 
a result of many pressures, not least 
the intense pressure to publish, too 
often find themselves delving into 
increasingly technical treatments of 
T

increasingly narrow issues, the re-
sult generally being notable only for 
its triviality and aridity. 
It might also be objected that, 
if philosophising is just a matter 
of thinking about things, then all 
human beings are philosophers. 
Aren’t we all Homo sapiens? Don’t 
we all think? Thinking, however, is 
one thing, thinking clearly, dispas-
sionately, and disinterestedly quite 
another. A quick trip to the Internet 
will bring this home. Look at almost 
any discussion in any forum, and 
you will find not only prejudice and 
partiality, but also a failure on the 
part of most participants to develop 
sound arguments of their own or 
to understand the arguments of 
others. Not only are many people 
unwilling to listen to, understand, 
and consider the positions and ar-
guments of those with whom they 
disagree — they seem simply to be 
unable to do so. Astonishing non 
sequiturs are commonplace, as are 
the conflations of distinct positions, 
simple logical fallacies, and an 
inability to spot such flaws in the 
arguments of others.
Philosophy  
as a protection
The ability to philosophise is use-
less, however, without the right 
aims and objectives. For example, 
the philosophising of a good per-
son may help her to perform the 
right actions, but no amount of 
rigour, patience, and analytic ability 
will turn a bad person into a good 
one. The philosophical method is 
simply a tool, which can be used – 
expertly or inexpertly – to do good 
or ill. Philosophy, as Socrates and 
Plato discovered the hard way, can-
not make people good or truthful; 
education won’t turn a dictator into 
a philosopher king, but may simply 
turn him into a more efficient dicta-
tor. Dictators rarely oppress whole 
populations; rather, they persuade 
part of their population to help with 
the oppression of the rest, and they 
generally do this by presenting spu-
rious arguments and flimsy but spe-
cious claims. Politicians in democ-
racies use the same techniques to 
try to win elections. What philoso-
phy can do is help us to defend our-
selves against those who wish to 
manipulate us, against those who 
are neither benevolent nor truthful. 
It cannot make people honest, but 
it gives us the tools with which to 
discover their dishonesty. 
Of course, philosophy offers great 
scope for the enrichment of the 
philosopher’s life, and many would 
argue that this is its most important 
feature. (It can also be extremely ab-
sorbing, and even fun.) Moreover, 
its breadth and reach mean that it 
has many roles for us today, some 
potential and some actual. With 
regard to the world beyond itself, 
though, whether in the field of poli-
tics or of religion, of commerce or of 
ethics, its usefulness lies primarily 
in the protection it offers against 
those who would, intentionally or 
otherwise, cloud our thoughts and 
lead us into error..
Dr Peter J. King, 
 Pembroke College, Oxford
A discussion forum on the internet.
Philosophy gives us the tools to discover dishonesty.
