The Courier looks back
The October 1967 issue of The UNESCO Courier carried 
an excerpt of a memorandum on international science 
scholarships presented by Marie Curie to the League 
of Nations in 1926. Twice laureate of the Nobel Prize, 
for chemistry and physics, she made a plea for the 
encouragement of vocations in science.
“At this post-university stage of their lives, young students who contemplate careers in science are brought face 
to face with pressing demands. In most cases the family has done its utmost to help the young man or woman to 
come this far and, unable to make further sacrifices, it now asks them to become self supporting. And even in 
well-to-do families the wish to take up very advanced studies may encounter a lack of understanding, such stud-
ies being considered as an extravagance or a mere whim. 
Yet what in fact are the best interests of society in this matter? Should it not give every encouragement to 
those called to a scientific vocation? Is it really so well-endowed that it can afford to reject the vocations it 
is offered? 
I believe, on the basis of personal experience, that the sum total of the aptitudes called for by a true scien-
tific vocation is an infinitely frail and precious thing, a rare treasure that is both absurd and criminal to throw 
away, a gift to which great care must be devoted so that it may grow and fructify. 
What, in reality, are some of the qualities required of the person who aspires to success in the field of inde-
pendent scientific research? The intellectual qualities are an intelligence capable of learning and understanding, 
a sure judgment capable of appraising the significance of theoretical and experimental demonstrations, an 
imagination capable of creative effort. Equally important are the moral faculties: perseverance, zeal and above 
all the unselfish dedication that guides the novice along a path which, in most cases, will never lead him to 
material rewards comparable to those offered by careers in industry or business. 
Thus to foster and safeguard the scientific vocation is a sacred duty for each society which has the inter-
ests of the future at heart. It is gratifying to see that public opinion is becoming increasingly conscious of 
this duty”. 
Marie Curie
