                                       Abdourahman A. Waberi is among the writers who have joined uNeSCo 
             in its fight against illiteracy. here is an extract from his text on the subject, to 
               be published by the organization in its forthcoming book, ‘The Alphabet of hope’..
The TWo Tracks of my life 
Abdourahman A. Waberi.

ike many writers of the young na-
tions of the late Third World, I ended 
up writing because those who had 
written about my country, my peo-
ple or my culture (I now put leaden 
quotation marks around all those 
notions) did not always give me en-
tire satisfaction. We are aware by 
now of Chinua Achebe’s suspicious 
examination of the otherwise sub-
lime work of Joseph Conrad. As for 
myself, I was often left hungry. The 
maritime adventures of the gentle-
man, Henry de Monfreid, to cite but 
one example, are unworthy of the 
most puerile childishness – sheeka 
carruureed, as we say in Somali. Yet 
I don’t pretend, obviously, to satisfy 
all those who read or will read me. I 
am set on bringing my contribution, 
simply and modestly, to share with 
everyone – countrymen, friends, 
guests passing through and for-
eigners, of course. For me, reading 
and writing represent much more 
than entertainment: they mean par-
ticipating – sorry, I’m going to use 
a grand phrase – in the edification 
thing that fell into my hands and ar-
rived as far as my shantytown: last 
month’s issue of the popular French 
magazines Paris Match and Nous 
Deux, wet from girlfriends’ tears, 
a used Blek Le Roc comic strip, a 
Reader’s Digest landed from who 
knows where, a San Antonio de-
tective story or Gérard de Villiers 
spy novel, if the gods were kind. As 
an adolescent I travelled on foot the 
two or three kilometres separating 
me from the country’s only library, 
the French Cultural Centre Arthur 
Rimbaud, located in the real town. 
Having ransacked the comic strip 
section, I attacked the so-called se-
rious reading, at least at that time in 
my life, which comprised Albert Ca-
mus as well as Christiane Roche-
fort. At the lycée, I made other dis-
coveries at the Reading Club, run 
by my French teacher and attended 
essentially by girls. My friends, who 
aspired to the serious disciplines 
(maths, physical sciences) openly 
despised my reading and my femi-
nine clan. It is only in France that 
I fully discovered the French- and 
English-speaking writers of Africa, 
the Caribbean, India, France or the 
entire world (from Nuruddin Farah 
to Derek Walcott, Mario Vargas 
Llosa to J.M. Coetzee, Walter Ben-
jamin to Joseph Roth, Michel Le 
Bris to Jacques Lacarrière, Pierre 
Bergounioux to Tahar Bekri), in 
short these inspirations that enthral 
me and lighten the burden of life. 
I never suspected for an instant that 
some of these authors I admired 
could one day become acquain-
tances, colleagues and even more, 
friends like Nuruddin Farah. I blithe-
ly stepped over the barrier sepa-
rating the reading and the writing. 
Reading and writing, the two tracks 
of my life. 
Abdourahman A. Waberi, 
Djiboutian writer
of the Nation. Reading and writing 
are also a way to live. To drift be-
tween the here and the elsewhere, 
two more and more elusive places, 
indistinct, scintillating with paradox. 
I continued to advance leaning on 
the guardrail of writing, to stagger in 
the spirals of spoken, translated and 
written poetry, most often in French. 
I buried myself in the ashes of Paul 
Celan’s language: “Ne cherche pas 
sur mes lèvres ta bouche, /ni devant 
le portail l’étranger, /ni dans l’œil la 
larme…”  “Seek not your mouth on 
my lips, nor a stranger at the gate, 
/nor a tear in the eye…” (Cristal, 
Gallimard, 1998). It spoke, it moved 
and it comforted the foreign student 
I was at the end of the 1980s and 
who I never stopped being. 
That is how, at less than 30 years 
old, I entered the educational cur-
riculum of my country. That is how 
future graduates sweat blood over 
my short stories (my novels are sub-
jected to a subtle but very effective 
censorship!) in mid-June, during the 
Baccalaureate exam, an exam that 
is still, 20 years into independence, 
in French and certified by the acad-
emy in Bordeaux, Rouen or Besan-
çon. Strange dizziness. 
What to read, then? For me, 
coming from a poor family without 
books except for a tattered and 
rarely opened copy of the Koran, 
I read almost nothing at home. I 
lived a schizophrenic childhood 
between two completely separate 
worlds, torn apart between family 
and school. Reading (in French, of 
course) was first accomplished in 
primary school through the inter-
vention of a sensitive teacher who 
introduced us to adventure novels. 
Eugène Sue and his Mysteries of 
Paris, the great Alexandre Dumas, 
The Three Musketeers, and the 
bard Victor Hugo, Les Misérables, 
were our first green pastures. Later 
I read, in the pell-mell of life, every-
