States facing the challenges of re-
gional integration – this was the 
focus of the seminar recently held 
in Cap Verde (24-26 September 
2007), as part of an extensive re-
search project launched under the 
auspices of the programme MOST 
(Management of Social Transfor-
mations). The project, exploring 
the reasons for the slow progress 
of a process essential for lifting 
West African countries out of their 
“maldevelopment”, has already or-
ganized national seminars in 10 of 
the 15 Member States of the Eco-
nomic Community of West African 
States (ECOWAS). Five more of 
these seminars will take place in 
upcoming months, leading up to an 
international conference in autumn 
2008 that will formulate proposi-
tions to be submitted to ECOWAS 
heads of state. 
Each of these 10 meetings pro-
vided the opportunity to gather 
around the same table scientists, 
political decision-makers and those 
involved in economic and social de-
velopment. “Often it was the first 
time they’d been brought together,” 
underlines Pierre Sané, UNES-
CO’s Assistant Director-General 
for Social and Human Sciences. 
The project clearly illustrates the 
objective the Social and Human 
Sciences sector (SHS) has set for 
the future: engage researchers and 
policy-makers in dialogue so that 
social transformations can be more 
closely linked to the values inherent 
in UNESCO’s Constitution.
Promoting dialogue
For Mr Sané, “The main thrust is that 
we’re no longer merely conducting 
and publishing research. Or prepar-
ing conventions and declarations. 
We want to go further and facilitate 
policy-making that takes into ac-
count the results of this research 
and the standards defined by these 
instruments. Such implementation 
demands dialogue, so SHS is cre-
ating places for dialogue.” This is 
the case for the programme? Net-
work? Supporting regional integra-
tion, but also for managing social 
                  “We’re no longer merely conducting and publishing research. 
 Or preparing conventions and declarations.” Pierre Sané, UNESCO’s assistant director-General 
                   for Social and human Sciences, wants to go further and get involved on the ground. 
                            Promoting dialogue and building capacity are his main goals.
making Room  
for dialogue

Federal Supreme Court of Justice, Brazil.

development, through regional or 
sub-regional forums of Social De-
velopment Ministers. The model, 
launched in Latin America back in 
2001, is now taking root in the dif-
ferent regions around the world. 
It encourages not only exchange 
between researchers and decision-
makers but also among the minis-
ters themselves. To date nearly 80 
ministers and ministry delegates 
have taken an active part in these 
regional or sub-regional meetings. 
The coalitions of cities against rac-
ism, is another programme pro-
moting dialogue. Here the cities 
facilitate connections between 
decision-makers, researchers and 
various representatives of civil soci-
ety at the local level to implement 
concrete actions – through educa-
tion, housing, employment or cul-
tural activities – against racism and 
exclusion. 
In the same area of human rights 
can be noted the existing networks 
or those being formed to tackle 
the obstacles encountered by 
specific rights directly concerning 
UNESCO: right to education with 
the Latin American Research Net-
work of Ombudspersons (LARNO) 
and cultural rights with the African 
Research Network on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights (AR-
NESCR). And the effort to create 
places for dialogue applies also to 
other SHS fields of action. 
Even philosophy fits in, as it cre-
ates dialogue between Asia and 
the Arab world, or Africa and Latin 
America. Post-conflict justice will 
thus be the issue debated at the 
philosophical dialogue between Af-
rica and Latin America, to be held 
in Angola.
Capacity 
building
Other examples, concerning wom-
en or ethics? Mr Sané started to 
cite some – the Palestinian Wom-
en’s Research and Documentation 
Centre, for one – and changed his 
mind. Obviously the strategic focus 
of dialogue still applies to those ac-
tivities, but they seem more closely 
related to the second main thrust: 
building capacities. This is not really 
a new priority for SHS: UNESCO 
has long been providing assistance 
to member states who request it. 
To develop scientific ethics, for in-
stance, to set up national ethical 
committees or regional centres, 
and so on. But there too momen-
tum is building. After Vilnius and 
Egerton, Doha and Cordoba will 
acquire Regional Documentation 
and Information Centres for bioeth-
ics education. The Asia Pacific re-
gion will soon be dealing with the 
ethics of energy technologies. An 
equivalent of the Palestinian wom-
en’s research centre is planned in 
the Great Lakes region of Africa. 
There is no shortage of projects.
Pierre Gaillard, 
(UNESCO)
Preparing for a workshop on democracy, human rights  
and the management of conflict (Cubal, Angola).

A father and his daughter in front of their house, in a shantytown in Italy.
