In the past decade, over 1,000 journalists have been murdered.  
According to Rodney Pinder, Director International News Safety Institute,  
as long the issue of impunity is not addressed,  
the number of deaths will remain high.
KILLING THE MESSENGER – 
THE DEADLY COST  
OF NEWS

According to Killing the Messen-
ger, the report on a two-year global 
inquiry just published by the In-
ternational News Safety Institute 
(INSI), 1,000 journalists and sup-
port staff died trying to report the 
news around the world in the past 
10 years. But, alarmingly, the great 
majority died in peacetime, working 
in their own countries. Only one in 
four news media staff died cover-
ing war and other armed conflicts. 
“At least 657 men and women were 
murdered,” says the report — “elimi-
nated as they tried to shine light 
into the dark recesses of their so-
cieties.” In two-thirds of cases, the 
report goes on, “the killers were not 
even identified, and probably never 
will be, underlining the absence of 
full and proper investigations when 
a journalist or other news profes-
sional is killed.” 
This question of impunity is the 
shocking secret at the heart of the 
inquiry. In many countries, murder 
has become the easiest, cheapest 
and most effective way of silenc-
ing troublesome reporting, and the 

more the killers get away with it the 
more the number of deaths spirals 
upwards. 
UNESCO has long recognised 
this problem. On 3 May 2003 – the 
day INSI was founded – Director-
General Koïchiro Matsuura declared 
“war on impunity”, saying: “Whenever 
one journalist is exposed to violence, 
intimidation or arbitrary detention be-
cause of his or her commitment to 
conveying the truth, all citizens are 
deprived of the right to express them-
selves and act according to their con-
science…”
Protecting journalists 
better
So what can be done? At the end 
of 2006, the UN Security Council 
unanimously passed Resolution 
1738 on the protection of jour-
nalists in conflict. The resolution 
reminds countries of their respon-
sibility to end impunity and to pros-
ecute those responsible for serious 
violations. But it only addresses the 
safety of journalists in conflict – the 
tip of a black iceberg. 
The Parliamentary Assembly of 
the Council of Europe, on the other 
hand, in Resolution 1535 this year, 
recalled the legal obligation of mem-
ber states to investigate any mur-
ders of journalists as well as other 
acts of severe violence and death 
threats. “Where attacks against 
journalists can be carried out with 
impunity, democracy and the rule of 
law suffer,” says the resolution. 
The INSI report suggests a number 
of more specific actions that would 
increase the safety of journalists, not 
least for governments to live up to 
their responsibilities under Resolu-
tion1738. It also urges international 
development institutions, such as 
the World Bank and the Internation-
al Monetary Fund, to reinforce the 
Resolution by including a country’s 
record on the murder of journalists 
when assessing the granting of aid 
and other assistance. 
The report also encourages gov-
ernments and international organi-
sations sponsoring media training 
in developing countries to include 
safety training. There is no point in 
training new journalists to be fear-
less reporters without showing 
them how to take care of them-
selves. Safety training, indeed, is 
critical in this hostile environment. 
With support from international do-
nors, including UNESCO, INSI has 
now provided free safety training to 
almost 700 news media staff in 13 
countries.
Caring for their own
But journalists cannot escape re-
sponsibility for their own safety by 
only pointing fingers at others. They 
too have responsibilities. The INSI 
report calls on all news organisa-
tions to observe the INSI Safety 
Code and acknowledge that they 
have a duty to care for all people 
in the newsgathering team. There 
is a responsibility to provide prop-
er safety training and equipment 
in both peacetime and in conflict. 
Meanwhile, news executives need 
routinely to provide confidential 
professional counselling to journal-
ists who have experienced trauma 
and other forms of extreme stress 
in the course of their duties. 
In the end, though, journalists can 
best help themselves by being true 
to quality, independent reporting. 
The support of society is essential 
in the campaign against those who 
kill and physically attack journalists.
