                                                Ecuador has considerably increased its investment in education.
            the country occupies an intermediate position regarding fulfillment of the Education 
                     for all objectives set in dakar (Senegal) in 2000. its Minister of Education 
                             raúl Vallejo corral describes the situation.
raúl VallEjo corral 
remove obstacles limiting access 
to education
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO Courier).

of the GDP allocated to the educa-
tion sector until 2012, or at least until 
the education sector’s part reach-
es 6% of the GDP, as UNESCO 
recommends. In 2005, the percent-
age was 2.4% and in 2006 it had 
already risen to 2.9%. This year we 
hope to reach 3.4%, then 3.9% 
in 2008. 
How are these measures 
applied concretely? 
We began by removing obstacles 
limiting access to education. In 
1992, we launched a programme 
to provide free textbooks to pupils 
in rural schools. In the period 
I would call the “long night of 
neoliberalism”, the programme 
was suspended, but we have 
revived it. We provide textbooks 
(mathematics, Spanish, natural 
sciences and social sciences) 
to all children within the public 
school system, from the first to the 
tenth year. 
We have also eliminated parents’ fi-
nancial contribution until the seventh 
year. From now on the State takes 
on all these costs, so that the right 
to free education guaranteed by 
our Constitution becomes a reality. 
We have also increased the number 
of days of school catering from 80 
to 120. In all we have 200 days of 
classes, so we are 80 short. Our 
goal remains to serve the children 
food on every school day. 
Furthermore, we are at the point of 
achieving universal education for the 
first year. Before, children started 
school at age six and now it’s five. We 
have hired 1,400 preschool teachers 
and this year we will hire 1,400 more.
Another very troublesome 
issue is indeed the shortage 
of teachers. In Ecuador, 
there is a shortage 
of 112,000 schoolmasters….
Yes, that’s true. The reason is that 
since 1998, not a single teaching 
job has been created. According 
to neoliberal reasoning, this meant 
spending more public money. Right 
now, we have two options to solve 
the problem: a programme encour-
aging teachers who want to retire 
to do so with a financial incentive of 
US$12,000 per teacher. This year, 
we will thus open 2,000 positions, 
and with the money saved, we will 
be able to make up the deficit by 
hiring younger teachers. And above 
all, a few weeks ago, President 
Rafael Correa decided that his 
Minister of Economy and myself 
would work together to create 
these 12,000 jobs, by conceding 
an investment of US$60 million. 
What reactions are being 
sparked by the debt swap  
initiatives for education? 
In 2005 and 2006, Ecuador de-
veloped a debt swap programme 
with Spain, in the amount of 
US$20 million. The debt swap was 
a success but it was fragmented 
into a multitude of small projects. 
We are currently negotiating a 
new more balanced swap that will 
cover overall projects. 
In general, debt swap opens up an 
interesting possibility for developing 
countries. But it should not be viewed 
as charity, consisting of sending us 
consultants or experts who would 
pocket 70% of the non-refundable 
loans to advise us to do what we 
already know. From another perspec-
tive, a useful strategy would be to 
insert debt swap into national educa-
tion plans. This would make it possible 
to fund concrete actions with easily 
verifiable results: repair schools, 
for instance, or equip them with 
computers. Obviously, UNESCO 
could be the ideal forum to promote 
Raúl Vallejo Corral, Minister of Education  
of Ecuador at UNESCO’s  
General Conference in 2007.
