the dubious privilege of being the only female associ-
ate professor in her specialized field in the University 
of Buenos Aires’ School of Medicine. 
“Even within this School,” she says, “most gradu-
ates are women, yet there is not a single one on the 
Board of Directors. And everyone thinks this is normal. 
The same applies to Conicet: there is just one woman 
on its board. In the University of Buenos Aires, it’s 
the same story. These figures conceal the hostility 
which women suffer on a daily basis.” 
Kochen, who also forms part of the Argentine Net-
work of Gender, Science and Technology (RAGCyT), 
points to an interview she had for an academic job as 
one example of this hostility. “They asked me what my 
private life was like, whether I had any children, if I 
was married…. I asked around, and found that none of 
the men had been asked the same.”
Many female scientists; 
few at the top
Women make up 59 percent of university students from 
all disciplines in Argentina. Among those who finish 
their degrees, women represent 66 percent of the total, 
and also achieve on average higher final grades. But 
looking at the scientific and teaching profession as a 
whole, it is clear that the presence of women thins out 
Argentina: the illusion of equality
The latest statistics look promising: 46 percent of all 
scientific researchers in Latin America and the Carib-
bean are women. Argentina, where this figure rises to 
51 percent, has just broken through the gender parity 
barrier, meaning that women form the majority in a 
research industry made up of 35,300 people. Yet 
behind these rosy-looking numbers lurks the truth 
that women are still far from achieving real equality. 
“The statistics are interesting in that they reveal 
how a critical mass of women has occupied this sector, 
but we still have to see what else is taking place. When 
you look at the whole life-span of careers in science, 
you see how the proportion of women starts to decline, 
that women don’t hold important positions, that there 
is no equity in access to grants, which has serious 
repercussions for a researcher’s autonomy and ends up 
generating more inequality,” argues Silvia Kochen, a 
doctor of medicine and neurologist, currently employed 
as a researcher by the National Council of Scientific 
and Technical Research (Conicet). Kochen is also a 
member of specialist neurological associations, and has 
In Argentina, one researcher out of two 
is female. But these numbers hide other 
inequalities.
© Sol Levinas
Silvia Kochen
© Flickr
Students in chemistry lab

at the top: over the last few years, for instance, the 
percentage of female grantees has risen over 50 per-
cent, but the percentage of women classified as “high 
researchers” - the top category - has stayed extremely 
low at 10 percent. The same applies to the class of 
independent researchers, one step below the top 
research grade, where women make up 25 percent of 
the total. Research institutes are mostly run by men, 
with the exception of those linked to the study of phi-
losophy and literature. In Conicet, meanwhile, women 
make up around 40 percent of total research staff, but 
represent only 12 percent of the Qualification and Pro-
motion Board, and a similar number in other standing 
committees. 
These figures are to be found in the report Wom-
en’s participation in science and technology in Argen-
tina, prepared in 2003 by María Elina Estébanez, who 
states that the situation has changed little since the 
study was drafted. The information provided by 290 
male and female researchers for her report also shows 
that women as well as men tend to prefer male scien-
tific role models, such as in their choice of research 
supervisors. But the report also identifies the spe-
cific obstacles that women face in their careers: the 
surveyed scientists declared that marriage and chil-
dren do affect the development of a career in science, 
and that this is made worse by the fact that doctor-
ates, post-doctorate studies and trips to international 
congresses coincide with a woman’s fertile age. 
Within Conicet, top appointments are made by gov-
ernment officials, who make their choices from a list of 
candidates put forward by working researchers. Noemí 
Girbal is the first, and for now the only woman to have 
been chosen by her peers and to have made it to the 
Board of Directors. The other seven directors, including 
the chair and two deputy chairs, are men. A doctor in 
history and a higher researcher, Girbal, who secured a 
second term as a director in 2005, has argued in public 
against affirmative action for women. She insists that 
it is important not to be led astray by stop-gap, make-
shift solutions, but to get to the roots of the problem: 
“scientific language conveys political power. Participa-
tion in the world of science has a lot to do with power, 
management, and the prestige of arriving at certain 
career rankings – and all of that is male.”
Prestige counts
The best strategy, Girbal insists, is to lay bare the ine-
qualities and hurdles to gender parity, which are far 
from being insuperable, and can be altered by political 
decisions. In the Sixth Iberoamerican Science, Tech-
nology and Gender Congress, held in the Spanish city 
of Zaragoza in September 2006, she made precisely 
this argument in her paper Sex in science. An assess-
ment of gender equality in the Argentine scientific 
system, which included several noteworthy observa-
tions: “There are no female deans in private universi-
ties, and very few in public ones. In scientific journals, 
the editors and editorial committee are often men, but 
articles are written by women, meaning that they do 
the work. On the other hand, we cannot maintain that 
in Argentina – unlike other countries – there are still 
wage differentials between male and female scientists; 
yet there is no doubt that differences arise as women 
are prevented from reaching certain posts. That is why 
I say this is not about substantive economic inequal-
ity, but essentially a question of prestige and power.” 
“None of this is reflected in the statistics, but is 
hidden: we have to deal with it in a different way, by 
looking into the deeper causes behind what is going 
on,” says Kochen, who insists on the end to draw up 
new indicators, a project that has been underway for 
several years in RAGCyT. ■
Soledad Vallejos in Buenos Aires, Argentina
© Sol Levinas
Noemí Girbal
