                       Jewel of mughal architecture, the red Fort in delhi was built in a unique style 
     – shahjahani – by india’s fifth mughal emperor, shah Jahan. this new World Heritage sit
                        has grown in historical stature with the passage of time and now 
        symbolizes india’s independence. For its founder, it was heaven on earth…then hell.
shah Jahan’s heaven and hell 
the Red FoRt in delhi
Shahjahanabad’s Red Fort (Old Delhi).


rle «If there be a paradise on earth, 
it is here, it is here” reads the in-
scription at the entrance of Qala-a-
Mubarak’a’. The couplet by the Per-
sian poet Amir Khusrau reveals the 
intention of Shah Jahan’s architects. 
They designed a citadel to match 
the Koran’s description of paradise, 
not unlike Ispahan in Iran. 
Shah Jahan is known as the man 
who so loved his favourite wife, 
Mumtaz Mahal, “light of the palace”, 
that after she died in 1631, he put 
20,000 builders to work on the fa-
mous Taj Mahal in Agra; the mauso-
leum in her memory was inscribed 
on the World Heritage List in 1983. 
He was also a mighty emperor who 

brought the greatest glory to the 
Mughal empire, founded in the 16th 
century by Babur, “The Leopard”, 
descendant of the fierce warlord Ta-
merlane – to whom we owe another 
fabulous World Heritage site, the 
14th century Samarkand, now in Uz-
bekistan. 
Shah Jahan will undoubtedly be 
remembered as the dynasty’s great-
est art lover and builder. His legacy, 
the Qala-a-Mubarak’a’, known as the 
Red Fort, was a citadel at the heart 
of the capital, serving as both impe-
rial residence and government head-
quarters.
The new red capital
When he decided to move the capi-
tal from Agra to Delhi in 1638, the 
emperor gave orders to build his 
“paradise on earth” on the banks of 
the river Yamuna, just like the Taj Ma-
hal. Today it is called Old Delhi, but 
then it bore the name of its founder: 
Shahjahanabad. 
Begun in 1639 and completed 
probably in 1648, the Red Fort ac-
commodated some 3,000 people. 
It is the first Mughal palace fort de-
signed according to an octagonal 
grid pattern, which later became an 
architectural characteristic of the dy-
nasty. Made primarily in brick, clad 
with sandstone or red marble, it rep-
resents a harmonious fusion of Per-
sian, Timurid and Indian elements, yet 
it is based on Islamic prototypes. The 
unique style, also distinguished by its 
complex geometric compositions, is 
named after the emperor: Shahjah-
ani. 
Connected in the north to Sa-
limgarh, an earlier fort built by Isma 
Shah Sur in 1546, the walls of the 
Red Fort stretch out for more than 
two kilometres. Their height varies 
from 16 metres on the river to 36 me-
tres on the town side. Two entrances 
allowed access to the citadel: the 
Delhi and Lahori gates. The first was 
used by soldiers and servants of the 
court. The second, facing the town 
of Lahore and giving onto the Chatta 
Chowk (palace market) was reserved 
for visitors and the emperor himself. A 
wide north-south road ran alongside 
the market. It set the border between 
the military camp to the west and the 
palace in the east.
Peacock throne  
and lotus pool
When the powerful and inconsolable 
Shah Jahan arrived for a public audi-
ence in the hall designated for that 
purpose, the Diwan-i-Am, he passed 
by the drum house (naubat khana or 
“They have inlaid stone flowers in marble,  
which surpass reality in colour, if not in fragrance.” 
Abu Talib Kalim, Shah Jahan’s court poet.
naqqarkhana), a three-storey rectan-
gular building for the musicians. In 
the audience hall stood the throne, 
incrusted with semi-precious stones, 
as elaborate and majestic as Solo-
mon’s if not an actual copy. 
But an even more sumptuous 
throne awaited him in the Diwan-i-
Khas, the hall for private audiences, 
where he met his ministers and court-
iers. More than 100 rubies and the 
same number of emeralds enhanced 
the splendour of the two peacock ef-
figies standing behind the royal seat, 
as well as countless diamonds, sap-
phires and rare pearls. The famous 
Peacock Throne had been taken as 
war booty from Iran by Nadir Shah. 
It was in 1739, a century after con-
struction of the Red Fort had begun, 
when the “Persian Napoleon” had 
devastated Delhi with fire and sword. 
Having disposed of affairs of state, 
Shah Jahan retired to the Khas Ma-
hal, his private pavilion with bed-
rooms, prayer rooms and a tower 
from which the emperor would speak 
to the people. The Khas Mahal was 
part of a series of royal pavilions in 
white marble giving onto the Yamuna, 
linked one to the other by a channel 
whose sparkling waters justified its 
name of Nahr-i-Behisht, the stream of 
paradise. 
To relax, Shah Jahan would retreat 
to one of the hammams, where hot 
and cold water flowed through pipes 
and the walls’ floral motifs created 
the impression of a garden. And at 
The Red Fort’s walls are more than two kilometres long.

The Red Fort’s walls hide unexpected treasures.


the southern end of the alignment 
was the ultimate paradise: the zena-
nas, or women’s quarters, consisting 
of one-storey pavilions also linked 
with channels and pools. His wives 
and mistresses lived in the Rang Ma-
hal pavilion (palace of colours), with 
ceilings adorned with gold and silver 
motifs reflecting the water and white 
marble of the magnificent lotus pool, 
a favourite ingredient of Mughal archi-
tecture. 
Symbol of power 
Shah Jahan lived less than 20 years 
in earthly paradise and ten years in 
hell, in the very same place. When he 
fell ill in 1657, he was deposed and 
imprisoned in the fort until his death 
in 1666, by his own son Aurangbzeb. 
Thanks to the latter we have the 
Moti Jasjid, the Pearl Mosque, which 
he built for his own use in 1659, to 
the west of his father’s hammams. 
The white marble mosque’s prayer 
room floor is inlaid with the outline 
of a prayer carpet in black marble. To 
the north of the mosque is laid out the 
splendid Hayat-Baksh Bagh, the life-
giving garden, its sections also sepa-
rated by water. 
But little remains of the heavenly gar-
dens. Since its construction, the fort 
has undergone much modification, 
the British in particular considerably 
changing its structure. In 1857, when 
the British crown took command of 
the Raj, it made the fort the British In-
dian Army’s headquarters. As a result, 
pavilions were torn down and colonial 
style military buildings replaced them, 
while Mughal gardens were trans-
formed into English ones. 
In 1947, after India declared its inde-
pendence, the Indian army took over 
the Red Fort and turned it into the 
symbol of the British colonial power’s 
defeat. The proof: the first Indepen-
dence Day celebrations took place 
there, on 15 August 1947. And since 
then, every year, the Prime Minister 
gives his Independence Day speech 
on this historically significant site.
Appasamy Murugaiyan, 
Indian linguist
