                  in cameroon, contract workers make up 53% of teaching staff at primary level. 
                             Systematically paid less than those with civil servant status 
                         and sometimes better qualified, contractors are in the process of founding a union.  
VincEnt bikono    
contract Worker and not proud of it
t his makeshift desk in a CM2 class 
(10-11 year olds) at the Melen public 
school in Yaoundé, Vincent Bikono, 
a teacher on contract, is deep in his 
thoughts while his pupils – 20 boys 
and 20 girls – complete their first 
history and geography tests of the 
school year. “I’m lucky,” he says. “Aid 
from Japan to Cameroon built three 
schools in our district. It allowed us to 
make classrooms less crowded, while 
in districts like Mballa II, Nlongkak 
or Tsinga, teachers find themselves 
in front of 100 pupils. Actually, in our 
school too, some of the lower grades 
still have classes numbering 95 
children.” 
But that’s as far as this teacher’s 
“luck” takes him. With his profession-
al diploma - CAPIEM – qualifying him 
to teach at preschool and elementary 
levels he found himself in the educa-
tional system more out of necessity 
than by vocation. “I had obtained a 
degree in law and I was unemployed. 
A friend one day advised me to take 
the qualifying exam for the state 
school for teachers. I passed and in 
1998 I started working as a substi-
tute teacher. It was survival instinct,” 
he recalls. It takes nine months to ob-
tain the diploma that qualifies teach-
ers in Cameroon.
Working as a teacher 
in Cameroon
He had to wait eight years to move up 
from substitute teacher to contrac-
tor. In 2006, some 10,300 substi-
tute teachers were promoted, giving 
them a slightly larger paycheck. But 
working conditions remain un-
satisfactory. “Being a teacher in 
Cameroon is not particularly pleas-
ant,” confides a disillusioned Mr 
Bikono. “If you’re a contract worker 
on top of it, you tend to feel marginal 
and frustrated.” His monthly salary 
comes to 99,000 CFA francs (about 
US$158), a long way from the 
starting salary of 140,000 CFA francs 
for a teacher with a civil service job. 
“It’s true that as a substitute teach-
er, I was only making 55,000 CFA 
francs, 10 months out of 13 in theory, 
but often more like seven out of 12 
in practice….As a contract worker, 
I get paid every month.” And indeed 
his salary is much superior to that of 
teachers in the private sector who 
earn between 20,000 and 50,000 
CFA francs (between 40 and 100 
dollars for eight or nine months of the 
year, as the employer pleases. But 
Mr Bikono feels he should be paid as 
much as his civil servant colleagues. 
“It’s discrimination. We’re doing the 
same job and we have the same 
amount of work. In fact, contractors 
are sometimes better qualified than 
civil servants, because some of the 
latter take the CAPIEM exam when 
they have only a BEPC (lowest level 
secondary school diploma).” The 
teacher becomes indignant about his 
paltry salary, which does not allow 
him to live decently and forces him to 
live in his father’s home. His wife has 
left him, tired of waiting for a “sup-
posed improvement of the situation”. 
Seven contract  
workers for three  
civil servants 
Contract teachers play a very impor-
tant role in Cameroon’s educational 
Pupils at the Melen school in Yaounde (Cameroon).

Teachers have a major responsibility  
in Africa. (Class in Ethiopia).

system, Vincent Bikono explains. “At 
the Melen public school, there are 
seven of us contractors and three 
civil servants, including the headmis-
tress, the secretary and one teacher.” 
The Ministry of Basic Education rec-
ognizes the importance of contract 
teachers by listing 36,000 of them 
in its mid-term expense budget for 
2007, not counting the 5,500 new 
hires last September. According to 
the government report on the national 
education system, contractors make 
up 53% of the teaching workforce at 
primary level. 
His teaching job involves giving 
pupils about a dozen classes, from 
|Monday to Friday, from 7.30 a.m. 
to 2.30 p.m. “It’s a huge work-
load. I give classes in grammar, 
spelling, mathematics, history, 
geography, English….not to mention 
sports! Luckily there aren’t too many 
pupils so when it comes to marking 
homework, things mostly go well,” 
recounts Bikono, who says a contract 
teachers’ union is being set up to 
better coordinate collective action.
Dorine Ekwè, 
journalist at Mutations, 
Cameroon.
What initiatives has Ecuador 
taken in order to achieve  
the Dakar goals? 
Our wager for achievement is con-
tained in the ten-year education plan 
adopted on 26 November 2006 by a 
national referendum, with more than 
66% of the vote. In other words, the 
people voted in favour of this plan and 
turned it into state policy. This means 
that independently of the govern- 
ment or of the minister in charge of 
this portfolio, the plan will be pursued 
until 2015. It rests on eight pillars (link 
towards Dakar goals), with the first 
four aimed towards universal educa-
tion and the rest concerned with re-
storing school infrastructure. 
Among other aspects of the plan, I 
would underline the development of 
a fairer wage policy for teachers and 
the establishment of funding policies. 
The latter consists of increasing by 
half a point annually the proportion 

Minister Raúl Vallejo Corral working with a child.

