A domain reserved for historians 
since the end of the 19th century, 
the Atlantic slave trade archives 
have acquired a new legitimacy in 
the last few decades as the memo-
ry of the event, raised to the rank of 
cultural asset. 
The European countries that prac-
ticed the trade in African slaves be-
tween the 16th and 19th century 
for the profit of their overseas col-
onies are, a priori, those that hold 
the largest repositories. The official 
correspondence of local colonial 
authorities, for instance, is today 
kept in the Public Records Office 
in Kew, United Kingdom (Colonial 
Office), the Archives d’Outre-Mer 
françaises in Aix-en-Provence, 
France (“fonds des colonies”), the 
Archivo General de Las Indias in 
Seville, Spain (“Capitania general 
de Cuba”), the Rigsarkivet in Co-
penhagen, Denmark, and the Arqui-
vo Historico Ultramarino in Lisbon, 
Portugal. 
In Africa, the victim of the trade, 
archives remain in those countries 
where in the era of the fight against 
illegal trade, a central administra-
tion was established – this is the 
case in the first states founded by 
freed slaves, like Sierra Leone and 
Liberia, whose collections have suf-
fered from recent civil wars. In Por-
tuguese-speaking countries (Cap 
Verde, Sao Tome e Principe and 
Angola), certain records of the for-
mer colonial government go back 
as far as the 17th century (Arquivo 
dal Camara municipal de Principe, 
since 1665). 
In America, national archives pre-
serve collections that are often in-
tact : in Argentina (the « Division 
Colonial-seccion Gobierno » start-
ing in the late 16th century), in Co-
lombia (The collection « Negros 
y Esclavos » from 1553), in Brazil 
(Fundo Marinha-Secretaria de Es-
tado, 1786-1895), and in Cuba 
(the private Valle-Iznaga archive go-
ing back to 1606).
Companies, ports  
and private collections
In addition, emblematic collections 
are to be found in the possession 
of the important companies grant-
ed the monopoly of the slave trade: 
the Dutch West-Indische Compag-
nie in The Hague (1675-1791), 
the British Royal African Company 
(1672-1731) in the Public Records 
Office in Kew, the West Indies and 
Guinea Company (1671-1754) in 
Copenhagen, and the Compagnie 
des Indes françaises in Lorient. 
Similarly, archives remain in the 
great European slave-trading ports 
(Liverpool, Bristol, London, La Ro-
chelle, Bordeaux, Nantes, Le Havre, 
Middelburg, Amsterdam). Cham-
bers of commerce, port authorities, 
former maritime courts (admiralties) 
have left extensive records of the 
seafaring slave trade throughout 
the 18th century, notably the ar-
chives on traders’ bankruptcies in 
Antwerp and Bordeaux. 
Finally, there are private collec-
tions like those of the Belgian 
slave-trading captain Van Alstein in 
Gent, or the slave trader Humphrey 
Morice, director of the Bank of Eng-
land from 1721 to 1736, in London. 
The abolition of the slave trade in-
spired important research on slav-
ery at the beginning of the 19th 
century in England, in the context of 
a parliamentary debate before the 
law was voted in 1807 (Parliamen-
tary Papers). The same occurred in 
France during the period of the July 
Monarchy until the 1848 abolition.
What do these archives 
contain?
The documents preserved in these 
collections perpetuate the memory 
of the slave trade and slavery. We 
discover notably the extensive se-
ries of registers concerning ship-
ping that can be used to produce 
quantitative data on slave trading 
and sometimes specific details on 
particular voyages. 
The ships’ seafaring documents 
also yield valuable information: 
regulations and shipping contracts 
that talk about discipline on board, 
captains’ reports that often give de-
scriptions of the places where trad-
                             registers and log books, memoirs and travel stories, slave census reports
             – the archives of the Atlantic slave trade provide signposts to the itineraries taken 
                by the old slave ships between europe, the Americas and Africa. 
                         Where are those precious documents now?
slave traDe archives: 
ports of call

Agreement prohibiting the trade  
of black slaves. Source: Real Audiencia -  
Cundinamarca, volume 16. 1557, June 18, 
Santa Fé (Bogotà).

ing was conducted, and log-book 
accounts of uprisings that broke 
out at sea. 
Memoirs and travel stories recount 
the history of slavery from another 
angle. Numerous in the 18th cen-
tury, they depict the different slave 
routes, sometimes including draw-
ings mapping the African coast 
and often relate the customs of the 
people who were the slave-traders’ 
prey. 
Other private collections come 
from agricultural properties in 
America, containing bills of sale 
for slaves, promissory notes or ac-
counting ledgers, all of them sourc-
es that make it possible to piece to-
gether the daily lives of slaves who 
worked on the plantations. 
Regarding census reports of 
slaves before and after abolition, 
we find in the Latin American colo-
nies, for instance, records of sales 
and mortgages of slaves in Brazil, 
and applications for emancipation 
in Argentina. In Africa too, there are 
lists of the names of slaves freed by 
the British navy, beginning in 1815, 
who were resettled in Sierra Leone 
(“Liberated African Registers”). 
Some archives recently brought 
to light, such as the Chinguetti 
Arabic manuscripts about Africa in 
Timbuktu (insert link to article) and 
those of the “zaouias”, religious or-
ders of the Algerian and Moroccan 
Sahara, may reveal new aspects of 
African slavery. 
These repositories are scattered 
all over the world, an indication of 
the magnitude of the task to be ac-
complished in taking inventory of 
and preserving the archives of the 
The port of Bordeaux-  
Claude-Joseph Vernet 1759.

slave trade. The publication in 2007 
by the Archives de France of a gen-
eral guide to the sources on the 
slave trade and slavery can set an 
example for Europe. In West Africa 
where some countries are emerg-
ing from civil war, safeguarding ma-
jor collections such as the one in 
Sierra Leone is a goal that must be 
taken on by the international com-
munity.
Louis Bergès, 
General Curator of National Heritage, 
Ministry of Culture, France
