Ligia Gargallo, a professor at the Catholic 
Pontifical University of Chile, located 
in Santiago, is the winner of the 2007 
L’Oréal-UNESCO prize for Latin America. 
In her opinion, the relative scarcity of 
women in science is the effect of cultural 
bias, which education can and must help 
overcome.
When you come face-to-face with a scientific prob-
lem, do you feel there is a distinctively female 
approach, a sort of sixth sense? 
I believe there is room for all sorts of human beings. 
One single scientific phenomenon can be viewed in 
different ways according to the characteristics, curi-
osity and emotions of the observer. This means that 
the way to enrich science is to draw equal contribu-
tions from both genders. 
Is it possible to speak of a specifically female con-
tribution to science? 
Science has neither frontiers nor gender barriers. It 
is one discipline, and it is completely global. What I 
will say is that the contribution of women is much 
smaller than it should be. I think it’s a fantastic idea 
to spur women to study science and encourage more 
women to become professional scientists. Besides 
everything else, they can give a lot to science, such 
as their female intuition, their sensibility and their 
curiosity.
What are conditions like for women scientists in 
Latin America, and particularly Chile? Are there 
wage differentials or other sorts of differences with 
male researchers? 
Female scientists are in a minority in Latin America, 
as they are in Chile. Inequality of course becomes 
more or less visible according to the specific field 
you are looking at. But the relative lack of women 
in science is in the first place a cultural problem, 
although you must not rule out the possibility that 
some women deliberately choose not to study sci-
ence. In any case, it is clear that we urgently need 
to draw up programmes that will enable us to 
encourage young talented people. We should start 
to work from high school onwards to stimulate a 
love for science. Young women must be convinced 
that they can rise to be outstanding scientists with-
out giving up their entitlement to motherhood, if 
that is what they want. 
As regards wages, there are still differences 
between men and women in industrial science, 
© Micheline Pelletier/Gamma
Ligia Gargallo



“Science has neither frontiers nor 
gender barriers”

though thankfully they have practically disappeared 
from the academic environment. 
Could you explain for us the main research that you 
are doing at the moment? 
I work in fundamental science, especially in com-
pound systems built out of large molecules, giant 
molecules, macromolecules or polymers. These types 
of systems can be found everywhere, but their behav-
iour is complex and quite different from that of small 
molecules. Natural polymers such as proteins, 
polysaccharides, cellulose and starch form part of 
living beings. And synthetic polymers, for instance 
new and modern materials such as polystyrene, 
polymethacrylates, nylon and polyethylene, are part 
of our daily lives, and have taken the place of older 
substances. We are currently studying the properties 
of these synthetic polymers when they are disturbed 
by mechanical or electrical forces, with the aim of 
understanding why they becomes viscous or elastic, 
for example. We are convinced that the only way to 
use these materials in new technologies to the bene-
fit of mankind is by understanding what is going on 
at the most basic, fundamental level – and that is 
what we are looking for. ■
UNESCO’s Santiago Office (Chile) 
in collaboration with L’Oréal Chile
