Cape Verde may soon boast six television channels. A 
fact hardly worth mentioning to a television viewer 
from the north, accustomed to choosing from a multi-
tude of channels offering information, entertainment, 
culture, sport, etc., but in Cape Verde, it amounts to 
an upcoming revolution. As was at the time, just 14 
years ago, the creation of Radio Nova, the first pri-
vate radio station in the country. 
Such major change in the media landscape can’t be 
improvised. Regulations are needed to prevent rule by 
the strongest prevailing, and to guarantee the public 
quality and pluralism. Specific texts were therefore 
adopted, criteria established and procedure set in 
motion – a jury reviewed the six applications for Hertz-
ian television licenses received by the Directorate for 
Social Communication (DGCS). The jury took into con-
sideration, for instance, each project’s range of cover-
age, as national coverage represents a significant asset 
for a country like Cape Verde, split into ten islands.
New regulations
Helping to set up regulations that are simultaneously 
fair, appropriate to the context and respectful of 
freedom of expression is part of UNESCO’s work to 
promote free and pluralistic media. The Organization 
therefore contributed legal expertise based on other 
countries’ experience. While there is nothing spec-
tacular about the cooperation UNESCO established, it 
will contribute in the long term to developing a high-
quality communication sector and the participation 
of citizens in managing public affairs. 
Beginning in 2002, UNESCO helped found the Felix 
Monteiro Press Centre, an information facility for 
journalists within the Ildo Lobo Culture Palace pro-
viding periodicals, newspapers and books as well as 
on-line media. Through its International Programme 
for the Development of Communication (IPDC), it 
then contributed to revising certain press laws and 
developing a new Social Communication code. Sev-
eral decrees, recommendations and resolutions have 
already been published. They concern notably the 
creation of private media, the regulation of journal-
ists’ press cards (a press card commission started up 
in July 2006), the rules governing access and activity 
for television operators, the register of companies 
and social communication media, and most recently, 
the rules for the public competition for private tele-
vision broadcasting.
Other projects
UNESCO also participated in the F_rum sobre Comu-
nica__o Social, a social communication symposium 
held in Praia on 8 and 9 December, which brought 
together media professionals, representatives of civil 
society and officials in charge of public policy. On 
this occasion, Sara Lopes, the Prime Minister’s Adjunct 
responsible for Qualification and Employment, men-
tioned other changes, announcing notably that the 
Cape Verdean government intended to concentrate on 
Cape Verde
Santo Antão
São Vicente
Branco
Santa Luzia
Raso
São Nicolau
Boa Vista
Sal
Maio
Santiago
Fogo
Secos
Islands
Brava
PRAIA
AT L A N T I C O C E A N
Mindelo
N
© UNESCO
A country split into ten islands



Media Revolution in Cape Verde
Fourteen years after the birth of the country’s first private radio station, Cape Verde 
is making notable progress in promoting press freedom. Measures have been taken to 
guarantee the public’s access to pluralistic, quality information.
4

modernizing the Ag_ncia Cabo-verdiana de Not_cias 
(Inforpress). The national press agency, currently suf-
fering from serious underinvestment, has an impor-
tant role to fulfill serving a population scattered 
among the different islands and a major diaspora. 
At the DGCS, headed by Eugenio Martins, other 
projects are under way that may also involve UNESCO. 
They concern aspects such as training, providing 
equipment for young people to conduct reporting in 
the different islands, and creating digital archives of 
the country’s television and radio. 
The outlook for media in Cape Verde looks even 
brighter thanks to these measures. In 2006, the 
country was ranked 47th out of 167 countries on the 
list assessing press freedom published by the NGO 
Reporters Without Borders. ■
