Hard to believe that fragile pieces of 
paper, which require the wearing of 
gloves for handling, can constitute 
a solid bridge linking past to present 
and European culture to indigenous 
culture of Mexico. The “Colleccion 
des Lenguas Indigenas” of the Jalisco 
Juan José Arreola public library in Mex-
ico comprises 166 books written for 
evangelical purposes during the colo-
nial era and the 19th century. This ex-
ceptional heritage contains precious 
information about four centuries of 
religious integration and about the lan-
guages of the first inhabitants of what 
would become the Mexican republic. 
“The collection contains a few of 
the first Mexican publications, some 
of them more astonishing than those 
published before the printing press 
(in 1500),” asserts Marina Mantilla 
Trolle, researcher at the University of 
Guadalajara. In a room as protected 
as a bank vault, where temperature 
and humidity are strictly regulated for 
optimal conservation of books, the his-
torian underlines the inestimable qual-
ity of the collection, representing 17 
languages belonging to nine different 
linguistic families, some of which have 
practically disappeared. For instance, 
the “Manual para administrar los san-
tos sacramentos” by Bartholomé Gar-
cía (1760) is the only register in exis-
tence written in coahuitleca. “There 
is a book in the opata language of 
which there are only four copies in 
the world. You even find works in 
Japanese. The missionaries used 
every book they found in the hope 
that some would help them com-
municate with the people living 
in the new countries where they 
landed.”
Among the rarest works is also the 
“Arte en lengua mixteca” by Fray An-
tonio de los Reyes (1593). Outside 
of Mexico, the only places the book 
can be found are in the Nettie Lee 
Benson Library at the University of 
Texas and in France’s National Li-
brary. 
To consult the whole collection, you 
have to go to Guadalajara. Otherwise 
you would need to visit more than ten 
libraries in Mexico, the United States, 
France and England.
Purgatory  
and butterfly 
Besides the fact that the books are 
rare, the value of the collection lies 
essentially in the information they 
provide. According to Marina Mantilla 
Trolle, this information is very useful 
to understand the development of in-
digenous languages and the process 
of integration in Mesoamerican com-
munities. Most of these books are bi-
lingual dictionaries, of Castilian trans-
lated into indigenous languages, and 
“artes” (grammatical descriptions) as 
well as catechisms, confession man-
uals and books of sermons. Some 
even contain very precise phonologi-
cal descriptions. 
One book, entitled “Vocabulario de 
Molina”, from 1571, is a very compre-
hensive dictionary which translates 
into “Mexican” words such as “pur-
gatory” (nechipauloyan neye otiloyan) 
or “butterfly cocoon” (tecilli). Another 
tome from 1578 sets out in its first 
pages the evangelical intention: “Es-
sential Christian doctrine in order that 
the ministers of these natives may 
teach them the principal mysteries of 
our holy Catholic faith and the natives 
understand.” 
In truth, the evangelical mission 
of the Spanish forced missionaries 
to learn the indigenous languages, 
which is why they were transcribed 
and studied in the books that are now 
             four centuries of colonization are recounted and illustrated in the “Colección de lenguas 
                indígenas” kept in guadalajara (Mexico). these 166 books, printed starting in 1539, 
                also preserve the memory of 17 indigenous languages, some of which have virtually disappeared
                         the collection was inscribed in UNeSCo’s Memory of the World register in 2007.  
a briDge between cultures

Castilian-Mechucan Glossary of Father Fray Maturino 
Gylberti, 1559.

part of the collection. These tomes 
were in the monastery libraries, but in 
the 19th century a free market law ex-
propriated the church’s possessions, 
making them state property, which is 
how they all came to be together in 
one library. 
One special feature of these vol-
umes is the seal the missionaries 
placed on certain copies to estab-
lish ownership. In somewhat the 
same way we now brand cattle, they 
heated metal until it was red-hot and 
pressed it to the book’s edge, burn-
ing the pages to mark them with an 
indelible imprint.
“Each of these books constitutes 
a major source of knowledge. The 
collection is something we are only 
just beginning to explore,” explains 
Marina Mantilla. A team of specialists 
in history, ethno-history, linguistics 
and philology from the Universities in 
Guadelajara and the Colegio de Mi-
choacán has been formed to study 
these tomes. “But unfortunately suf-
ficient funding is lacking for research 
on this heritage the libraries contain, 
as well as for its conservation and 
restoration,” the historian adds. 
Living memory  
of vanished languages
Yet she is optimistic, because since 
digitization began on part of the col-
lection, the interest shown by sci-
entists from different regions of the 
world has grown significantly. “Ac-
cess to these works has been facili-
tated, because it’s in our interest to 
ensure the books are known to the 
general public and not just academ-
ics,” she concludes. 
a briDge between cultures
“Leafing through these books, 
some more than three hundred years 
old, is like travelling through the past. 
Many have handwritten annotations 
by monks. These texts testify to the 
evolution of culture and languages. 
They also offer a living memory of lost 
languages. That’s how they create a 
bridge between eras and cultures,” 
says Mantilla. 
“We would like to safeguard this 
treasure, study it and promote it, but 
it doesn’t belong to the University of 
Guadelajara, or to the state of Jalisco, 
nor to Mexico. It is part of the world’s 
heritage, says the researcher, as she 
closes, with almost maternal solici-
tude, “El camino al cielo en lengua 
Mexicana”, printed in 1611.
Juan Carlos Núñez Bustillos, 
Mexican journalist
Tarahuamara-Spanish textbook  
for bilingual teaching, printed in  
Chihuahua in 1945.
