It was interesting. It was challenging. It was dan-
gerous, too. Twenty journalists from popular Mon-
golian media investigated corruption issues for the 
first time and I felt lucky to be part of that intense 
eight-month programme. The team I was working 
with focused on three articles whose titles were: 
Suspicious Facts of Law School, True Face of Two 
Friends and Freedom to Journalists! 
The training and supervision were provided by 
the Mongolian freedom of expression advocacy 
group Globe International in cooperation with 
Press Institute and the initiative was coordinated 
by UNESCO’s office in Beijing. 
We needed to find information, and information 
sources, facts, adequate proof and documentation. 
And we did not have any experiences.
Beginning the 
investigation
In January, we received basic training in 
investigative reporting. We formed four 
teams and we investigated corruption 
cases in the fields of health, economy, 
education and environment. I was in the 
Education team. 
In April, Yvonne Chua from Philippine 
Center for Investigative Journalism came 
to evaluate our investigations and help us 
with the writing of our stories. 
During the workshops we learned that 
corruption is more than bribery; that abuse 
of power comes in many shapes and forms. 
After hours of discussion, my group agreed to 
focus on entrance and graduate exams at the Law 
School of the Mongolian National University, where 
we had a confidential source works. 
With the help of a person who shall remain 
unnamed, we were able to access and copy the 
director’s instructions over the past 10 years. It 
transpired that the Director, S. Narangerel, and his 
Deputy, N. Lundendorj, were the only people in 
charge of the State Examination Commission. 
Interestingly, we found that around ten present 
and former Members of the Parliament received 
degrees from the evening faculty of the Law 
School. Yet we found no trace of their enrollment 
at the school. 4
Investigative journalism in Mongolia
Enkhbaatar G. is a journalist with the Ardyn Erkh daily newspaper. In 2005, 
he participated in the “Media for Transparent Governance” programme. 
Its goal: to raise Mongolian journalists’ awareness of corruption and train them 
in investigative journalism.
© UNESCO
Setting of IPDC’s community radio project

Documents further showed that Mr. N. Lunden-
dorj has got his bachelor degree and Ph.D from the 
evening faculty and gained Ph.D while he was 
working as deputy director. 
We decided to look into the entrance exams to 
the Law School. One member of our team went 
there and as she was submitting documents for 
admission, a fellow applicant told her that he can 
buy the test of exams for 300,000 Mongolian 
togrogs (approximately US $258). He proposed that 
they share the amount. 
A day before exams, our journalist and the 
applicant were given 42 questions out of the 50 
questions of the entrance exam, enough to pass. 
Both took the exam and both were admitted. The 
questions were given to them by the sister of the 
applicant who had dinner with the director of the 
law school the day before the exam. 
The guy had arranged for the questions to be 
bought demanded his payment. After long discus-
sion, we decided to tell him the truth. He was 
shocked and asked not to publish his name.
The results
Journalists completed their articles in October 
and our material was published with the team 
names. It is sad to say that our team refused to 
publish one of the stories we investigated. 
Instead, we published one titled “Freedom to 
Journalists!” 
The story we did not publish exposed serious 
corruption, but we couldn’t publish it and this is 
very regrettable. Current legislation means that 
following somebody is persecution, collecting 
information is infringement of privacy and may 
violate legislation protection the secrets of 
organizations or the state. Taking pictures can 
be considered an encroachment on the subject’s 
private life and recording their voices without 
consent is illegal. Criticizing someone is tanta-
mount to defamation. And judges require notary 
verification before they will accept the docu-
ments we may produce as valid evidence. The law 
does not provide for freedom of information, nor 
does it recognize our rights to protect our 
sources. 
If investigative reporters must 
work the way detectives do, that is 
not possible in Mongolia. We did do 
it, but we ran the risk of being 
accused in violation of numerous 
provisions of the Criminal Law. 
And we wouldn’t stand much of a 
chance of winning in front of a 
court of law. Even if we enjoyed a 
fair trial, we would lose the case 
because there is no Mongolian law 
to protects us. 
In the end, we learned how to 
look out for and detect corruption. 
But we have also learned to practice 
self-censorship. ■
Enkhbaatar G. in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia
© Flickr/Harunire
Mongolian University of Science and Technology
4
