C of reasoning]. This is what is meant 
by Socrates humorous claim: “Only 
one thing I know, and that is that I 
know nothing”. The Oracle had said 
that he was the wisest of men. But 
when his fellow Athenians came 
to him with this piece of news, 
Socrates forced them to realize 
that they still had to make up their 
own minds. The coming of age of 
European university philosophy is 
marked by Kant´s equivalent claim 
in “Was ist Aufklärung?” when he 
sums up the Enlightenment in the 
maxim: Sapere aude! Dare to think 
(for yourself)!
Some are more equal 
than others
Humour permeates humanity. 
More, humour is both the most pene- 
trating of our theoretical capacities 
and the most human of our practi-
M. e. orellana Benado :  
the humAnity of humour
ompare the rhetorical impact of the 
following claims: 
1. “Prof. Dr. B. might be the great-
est philosopher alive today, but she 
lacks a sense of humour”
and, 
2. “Prof. Dr. O. might be the great-
est thief alive today, but he has a 
sharp sense of humour”. 
Lacking a sense of humour di-
minishes the value of a person’s 
achievements, whereas its posses-
sion rescues the humanity even of 
those whose behaviour is despica-
ble. In this article I propose to dis-
cuss the role of humour, the human-
ity of humour as I prefer to call it. 
The birth of Greek philosophy was 
completed when a field of reflec-
tion and debate appeared in which 
authority arguments where not al-
lowed [i.e. ad baculum arguments 
in which authority takes the place 
cal abilities. By “theoretical” I mean 
capacities directed to the contem-
plation or perception of the world; 
by “practical” I mean those that al-
low us to manipulate it or to bring it 
into existence. Our human world is 
essentially incongruous. This is why 
it helps us in our survival to be able 
to extract the comic aspect of the 
incongruous as well as to perceive 
the comic when we face it. But, why 
is the human world incongruous? 
The reason is as simple as it is 
unavoidable. Things human need 
to be approached in two opposite 
ways. According to a luminous and 
basic truth: All human beings are 
equal. Different grounds have been 
offered for this abstract postulate: 
that we all are God’s creatures; that 
we are all free; that we all have the 
same nature and are thus liable to 
suffer and, to cut short the list, that 
we have the same human rights. 
But concrete experience shows an 
approach based on another lumi-
nous truth, ironically formulated by 
George Orwell as “some are more 
equal than others”. The grounds ad-
vanced for this vary: only we belong 
to the true religion or, indeed, to no 
religion; to this or that country, gen-
der, social class, political party or, 
to this or that profession, and so the 
list goes on. 
We need to speak of ourselves 
as having different identities or life-
styles. The concept of prejudice is 
closely linked to that of identity or, 
if you prefer, lifestyle. There is no 
identity without its foundation of 
prejudices. In the case of personal 
identity, each individual human be-
ing is only equal to him or herself. All 
cultures rightly signal the birth and 
        “there is nothing so ridiculous but some philosopher has said it,” cicero argued. 
                    chilean philosopher m. e. orellana benado for his part postulates 
                             that humour “has more to do with the diversity of ways in which we live 
            (that is to say, with our identities), than with the way we reason and think 
                      (that is to say with our nature as human beings).”
M. E. Orellana Benado (Chile).

death of their members in a special 
fashion. Every time a new human 
being is born something unique has 
come into existence. And each time 
one of us dies something unique 
has gone out of it.
Humour:  
mirror of our identities
Among other things, human equa- 
lity means that we are all liable to 
suffer. This is where Black Humour 
enters the stage, in its two forms. 
One manifests itself when we laugh 
at incongruities related to our own 
suffering so as to distance our-
selves from it. This human capacity 
has been widely documented. Even 
in Nazi extermination camps, some 
prisoners joked about their pre-
dicament. The other form of Black 
Humour involves laughing to come 
close to the suffering of others. 
Such was the case, for example, 
with the jokes about anthropophagy 
made by Chileans in 1973 when, 
over two months after their plane 
crashed in the Andes, a few surviv-
ing members of a Uruguayan rugby 
team were found. Chileans were 
laughing with the young survivors, 
and not laughing at the victims of 
such a horrible experience. Black 
Humour reflects human equality, 
under which lurks the reality of hu-
man suffering. 
Exit Black Humour, and enter its 
counterpart: Prejudiced Humour. 
The interaction between different 
human identities often presents as 
ridiculous the peculiar practices 
of different lifestyles. Take Scho-
penhauer’s story about the “White 
Man” and the “Red Indian”. Upon 
seeing him leave food on his an-
cestor’s grave, the former asks 
whether the tribe expects the de-
ceased to return from death and 
eat it. After smiling silently for an 
instant, the “Red Indian” replies: 
“Sure, the same day your ances-
tors will return from death to look at 
the beautiful flowers your tribe puts 
on their graves”. By laughing with 
Prejudiced Humour at alien practic-
es we keep a distance from human 
identities or lifestyles different from 
our own. 
Rational argument only becomes 
possible between those who, to an 
extent, share the same sense of hu-
mour; that is to say, agreement on 
what is worth taking seriously and 
what only deserves a laugh. But 
what is serious and what is comic 
has more to do with the diversity of 
ways in which we live (that is to say, 
with our identities), than with the 
way we reason and think (that is to 
say with our nature as human be-
ings). Perhaps this is what Cicero 
suggested when he claimed that 
“there is nothing so ridiculous but 
some philosopher has said it.
Dr M. E. Orellana Benado, 
Associate professor at the Faculty 
of Law, University of Chile.

Some are more equal than others.

Ridiculous or just different?
