PhilosoPhy
A cosmic 
resPonsibility
eight philosophers contributed 
to this issue of the UNESCO Courier, 
focusing on the role of philosophy today. 
Different approaches, varied concerns, 
but one certainty: philosophy can’t stay 
in its ivory tower. it provides a weapon 
against dogma and manipulation. 
And, to cite one of 
Jostein Gaarder’s ideas, philosophers 
have a cosmic responsibility.
tey stand up against dogma and 
manipulative arguments. They ex-
press concern about intolerance 
and rising fanaticism. They remind us 
too that we are primates and our first 
task should be taking care of the planet. 
And they advocate philosophy that 
goes beyond mere words. 
“I don’t believe at all in what is com-
monly called today the death of phi-
losophy,” wrote French philosopher 
Jacques Derrida in 1972. 
Nor do the philosophers in this issue. 
But they do recognize that philoso-
phy’s impact on society is not what 
it could be, and philosophers them-
selves are partly to blame. And how 
could they make themselves useful? 
“By avoiding speaking in a way that 
is abstruse, fuzzy, incomprehensible, 
to a few fans of sectarian modes of 
thinking who get off on sticking to-
gether and intellectually reproducing 
through incest,” answers Michel On-
fray (France), a resolutely down-to-
earth philosopher. 
Jostein Gaarder (Norway) would be 
the last to contradict him, being some-
one who advocates a philosophy that 
can help us write the instruction man-
ual for spaceship Earth. “Philosophy 
is nothing less than a celebration of 
mankind’s consciousness,” he says. 
“So shouldn’t a philosopher be the 
first to defend human consciousness 
against annihilation?” Here, the author 
of “Sophie’s World” warns us, “We 
are the first generation to affect the cli-
mate on earth – and perhaps the last 
that won’t have to pay the price for it.” 
As for Turkish philosopher Ioanna 
Kuçuradi, she explores the verbal 
domain to denounce a certain con-
ceptual confusion, reigning notably in 
political discourse. She takes interest 
in the word “value”, which she sees as 
a catch-all term, stating, “In an age in 
which the search for meaning leads 
people to become suicide bombers, 
fully grasping the concept of value and 
that linked to ethical values is another 
task expected from philosophers.” 
“Dictators rarely oppress whole 
populations; rather, they persuade 
eDitoriAl 
part of their population to help with 
the oppression of the rest, and they 
generally do this by presenting spu-
rious arguments and flimsy but 
specious claims,” notes Peter J. King 
(United Kingdom). Yet another philoso- 
pher who wants to clear up the ver-
bal fog conjured up by simplistic non 
sequiturs and deception. 
“In countries under the boot of author-
itarian, not to say rogue, regimes,” con-
tinues Mohammed Arkoun (Algeria), 
“the return of religion can be inter-
preted as the quest for refuge.” And 
he underlines that religiosity is gaining 
ground in the richest societies too, 
resulting in the marginalization of 
philosophical thought and culture. 
Let us abolish religion’s authority over 
morality, admit we are not infallible, 
stop imposing our mores as universal 
law – we will stand a better chance 
of establishing a dialogue enabling us 
to avoid conflicts, adds Kwasi Wiredu 
(Ghana). 
Woo-Tak Kee concurs. “There is 
a limit to the roles that religion and 
politics can play in resolving conflicts 
among human cultures. It’s the philos-
ophers who should provide solutions,” 
writes the South Korean philosopher, 
who launches here a debate on a 
philosophy of universality, or, to put it 
another way, a philosophy in search 
of universality in the midst of cultural 
diversity. 
It is precisely the diversity of our lives 
that produces humour, writes M. E. 
Orellana Benado (Chile) who choos-
es to tackle the question of philoso-
phy from the angle of laughter. “Our 
human world is essentially incongru-
ous,” he says. “This is why it helps us 
in our survival to be able to extract the 
comic aspect of the incongruous.” 
Alongside this main dossier, the 
Courier presents two retrospectives: 
one is a collection of interviews 
we have previously published, 
“Philosophers’ Corner”; the other 
focuses on “Philosophers celebrated 
by UNESCO.”
