SSaturday, 21 July 2007. At 9 a.m., 
Sam Ndiaye has yet to emerge 
from its torpor. A diffuse, light tor-
por, unlike that of so many other 
Senegalese villages. A joyful torpor! 
Because this village of nearly 500 
souls, located some 80 kilometres 
from Dakar and two kilometres from 
the nearest asphalt road, may not 
yet have electricity, but its inhabit-
ants exude a rare joie de vivre. 
Warm welcomes sound from all 
sides – from the village chief who 
receives the required courtesy visit 
most cordially, from the head of the 
local Degoo organization (“accord” 
in Wolof, Senegal’s most wide-
spread language), and in between, 
from Sam Ndiaye’s women and 
children. 
Besides Senegalese hospitality, 
which is legendary, particularly in 
the rural world, the population’s en-
thusiasm is prompted by the nature 
of the visit: a journalist, escorted by 
Tostan’s programme director, has 
come to profile the achievements of 
the non-governmental organization, 
which has gained recognition with 
its remarkable non-formal basic 
education programme. And as it 
turns out, Sam Ndiaye played a sig-
nificant role in the inspiring story of 
Tostan, because it all began here. 
A Wolof word, ‘tostan’ means 
‘hatch’ or ‘breakthrough’. And, judg-
ing by the results, we can indeed 
talk about a genuine breakthrough, 
to the great satisfaction of Molly 
Melching, Executive Director of the 
      literacy, microcredit, rejection of female circumcision – these are among 
      the achievements of Tostan, 2007 laureate of uNeSCo’s king Sejong literacy Prize.
       The NGo focuses on adolescents and adults, most of whom have never set foot in school. 
               Distinguishing characteristics: mother tongue instruction and use 
                            of traditional modes of communication.
NGO, which aims to provide partici-
pants with the knowledge and skills 
they need to become empowered 
individuals, able to take charge of 
their economic development and 
bring about social change within 
their community.
Mother language, 
key to success
Ms Melching founded Tostan in 
1991, after developing the Demb 
ak Tey (‘Yesterday and Today’ in 
Wolof) resource centre, which also 
offered non-formal education, from 
1976 to 1988. She took advantage 
of suggestions from participants 
and outside evaluations to better 
adapt her new NGO’s programme 
to people’s needs. 
from idea To breakThrouGh,  
The iNspiriNG sTory of TosTaN 

from idea To breakThrouGh, The iNspiriNG sTory of TosTaN 
permanent employees in Dakar and 
Thies, in Senegal, 303 contractors 
work all around the country. In ad-
dition, more than 40 staff and 160 
contractors are scattered through-
out Guinea, Somalia and Gambia. 
A similar programme has just been 
launched in Mauritania. 
For the last 15 years, Tostan has 
developed relationships with vari-
ous donors including UNICEF, 
the United States Agency for In-
ternational Development (USAID), 
the Wallace Foundation, the Wal-
lace Global Fund and the Hilda 
and Jacob Blaustein Foundation, 
as well as other foundations and 
individual donors. In 2006 its 
annual expenses totalled more than 
US$ 3,200,000. 
In a UNESCO publication*, Cyn-
thia Guttman rightly pointed out 
that Tostan demonstrates how 
people who have received no for-
mal education, coming from villages 
with minimal resources, can im-
prove their environments and their 
lives, thanks to a well-designed 
programme that opens the way to 
greater self-determination.
Mamadou Amat, 
Senegalese journalist
*Breaking through: TOSTAN’s non-formal 
basic education programme in national  
languages in Senegal, UNESCO, 1995
At the beginning, recalls Khalidou 
Sy, Tostan’s Programme Director, 
the goal was to promote non-formal 
education in Dakar’s working-class 
Medina neighbourhood for chil-
dren in difficult circumstances, who 
weren’t part of the normal National 
Education system. “These children 
thus had access to books, theatre, 
puppets, various games and other 
activities inspired by Senegalese 
tradition and in their mother tongue,” 
he explains. The approach was fur-
ther refined as time went on and 
produced tangible results, which 
are visible in Sam Ndiaye and nu-
merous other communities. 
As for Ms Melching, she empha-
sizes “the importance of human 
rights education, not at university or 
academic level, but at the people’s 
level, in their national languages.” 
Human rights education is “the 
foundation of all community devel-
opment projects,” she explains. 
But if there’s one facet that makes 
Executive Director Melching partic-
ularly proud, it’s the empowerment 
of women. Those who have partici-
pated in Tostan’s programmes now 
express their ideas in public and 
participate in decision-making with-
in their families and communities. 
Some have emerged as leaders 
of opinion, like the Malicounda vil-
lage women who became pioneers 
when they decided to put an end 
to the harmful ancestral tradition of 
female circumcision.
Education 
= Self-determination
Tostan operates outside the formal 
education system and is directed at 
people who, for the most part, have 
never attended school. Its capacity-
building programme for communi-
ties aims to provide participants 
with life skills related to democracy, 
human rights, health, hygiene, litera-
cy, business management, account-
ing, microcredit, etc. It lasts for 30 
months and uses traditional modes 
of communication including discus-
sion, song, dance, theatre and po-
etry. It is implemented by specially-
trained volunteers who usually 
belong to the same ethnic group 
as the community concerned. The 
facilitators live in the villages where 
they give their classes, three times a 
week, to groups of 30 participants. 
Each village has a class for adoles-
cents and another for adults. 
With international headquarters 
in Washington, D.C. in the United 
States, where five people work 
(one staff and four volunteers), 
Tostan runs its African office in the 
Senegalese capital. Besides the 66 
