Baroness Greenfield, Professor of 
pharmacology at Oxford University and 
author of a UK report on women in 
science, advocates stronger strategic 
approaches to addressing the issue of 
female under-representation in scientific 
careers.
Question: What is the situation of women in the 
field of science? 
Answer: It has changed a lot over the past ten or 
twenty years, but there is still a lot of work to be 
done. It is easier now for women at the junior level 
than when I was an undergraduate and there were 
relatively few women students. Now, in biomedical 
sciences, almost 50% of the students are women but 
there are still problems in the physical sciences. I 
think that at the junior level it is getting easier for 
women to do this. However, there are still serious 
problems as women progress in their careers. 
The report (SET FAIR, 2002) shows that in the 
physical sciences, you have 90% men and 10% women 
across the board. In biological sciences, however, 
there are about the same number of men and women 
in the beginning of university studies. But around 
the late 20’s, early 30s, women begin to drop out. By 
the stage of Professor, the rate in biological sciences 
is just as bad as for the physical sciences, that is 
90% men and 10% women.
Question: What is the biggest hurdle that women 
science researchers face? 
Answer: In particular, as you can see in my report, 
the big problem is for women in their late 20’s when 
they have to make a choice about whether to have 
children. Do they choose not to have children and 
carry on doing science? This is what I did. Or do they 
choose to have children at the biologically optimal 
age but run the risk that they won’t come back to a 
job at all because they don’t yet have tenure? Or do 
they delay having a child until they are beyond the 
biologically optimal age, in which case they may run 
into fertility issues? None of these choices are really 
ideal for women—it’s a problem that hasn’t been 
solved. How can the scientific community accommo-
date women so that they can have children without 
compromising their careers? How can we allow women 
scientists to have as much choice as they want? 
Question: What can we do to change things? 
Answer: There is no quick fix. Men and childless 
women are not taking time off. If you are taking © Baroness Susan Greenfield 4
“We need the best people 
as scientists”

time off, it is happening just at the time that you 
have to publish papers to get ahead. One option that 
I have proposed is a funding scheme that give money 
to women who have children. That way women who 
want children could apply for a fellowship that is not 
available to anyone else. This enables women to 
come back and work for two years to reestablish 
themselves in their field. They would be competing 
with other women in the same situation.
Question: Why is the lack of women in science 
important? 
Answer: Because we are entering into an era where 
science and technology are at the centre of society, 
and we need the best people as scientists. Not just 
doing research, but in the media, politics, industry. 
You need the best possible brains and it is crazy to 
eliminate 50% of the talent. And also each individual 
should be able to fulfill herself to the best of her 
potential. If you have great potential as a scientist it 
is a great shame if you are prevented from doing that 
because you are a woman. Also the world can’t afford 
to have all that expensive education and training 
wasted. 
Question: What opportunities are there for young 
women studying science today? 
Answer: What women don’t realize is that science has 
a very exciting range of options. So for example, I 
am in the House of Lords now—and there are about 
10% of us who have some sort of science credentials. 
It is hugely exciting to go into politics or to do law 
or the media as a scientist. It is not just bench sci-
ence because science is so central now. Traditionally 
the worst sectors in terms of female representation 
are biotechnology and academia. ■
Interview by Edna Yahil 
© Micheline Pelletier/Gamma
Margaret Brimble, New Zealand
