strange language. 
Let’s say it’s a whale….
Born in Luxembourg into an Italian-
speaking family, having spoken 
Luxembourgeois in the street, studied 
in French, German and English, 
improved his Spanish in Cuba, poet-
novelist Jean Portante tells us here 
about his “strange language”, a medley 
of foreign languages jostling each other 
inside his head. 4
© UNESCO/Éditions Empiria
Italian translation of Mrs Haroy or the Memory of the 
Whale by Jean Portante.
© UNESCO/Collection Présence Africaine
In 2006, UNESCO took part in the 50th Anniversary of the 1st 
International Congress of Black Writers and Artists. Group 
photo of the participants in 1956.

Languages, in my head, are nebulae intermingling 
and giving birth to the “strange language”. When-
ever, for instance, I say or write the word “bougie” 
(French for candle), like a very close echo the Italian 
“buggia”, its enemy brother, appears. And while the 
French evokes illumination – light no matter how 
feeble or fragile its shine – and also to some degree 
truth, in Italian “buggia” means, with no ambiguity, 
“lie”, absence of light. When I say or write the word 
“bougie”, there breathes within it, colliding with the 
light, the lie that brings darkness. 
The whale works like that. Invisible at first glance, 
the lung of terrestrial memory has worked its way 
into what is apparently the body of a fish. Similarly, 
within itself my “bougie” conceals that which erases 
it. Or “shaperases” it. Shapes it as it erases it. 
Because while my “bougie” is no longer clarity, nor is 
it yet concealment. It’s the path leading from one to 
the other. Just like the whale, an animal neither ter-
restrial nor aquatic, is the voyage setting out from 
the mammal trying to reach the fish. 
All this had little impact when as an adolescent 
and then a young man I was passing my exams, flirt-
ing or doing my job as professor (of French, already). 
The new country, Luxembourg, had made me the gift 
of three languages. I used them according to circum-
stances. True providence! To read Goethe, Rilke, Musil 
and Celan in German, Voltaire, Baudelaire, Rimbaud 
and Proust in French, is a blessing. I am indebted to 
the country chosen by my family. 
Things started going wrong when I turned (belat-
edly) to writing. Suddenly trilingualism was no longer 
of any use to me. Suddenly it was time to choose. 
You can’t write a book in several languages at once. 
And yet… 
Suddenly too I realized that despite the linguistic 
plurality that was mine, none of the tools I had 
forged for myself allowed me to really work. The 
inside language was missing, the one that came from 
farther away and being of course on my lips, had 
made me discover Dante, Leopardi and Pavese, but 
was too dead to be able to enter my books. 
Therefore I undertook that other voyage, the long 
conquest of the written word, by setting my sights 
on a cousin of that language, French. And at the 
beginning, to be honest, I felt at ease. Like a fish in 
water, far from the whale. The inside animal said, 
that’s it, the conquest is finished, you’ve arrived in 
your new home. Alive.
A not insignificant anecdote
Anecdote. It takes place where long ago the journey 
began, in Italy. In the spring of 1995, my book Ouvert 
fermé (Open closed) had just been translated in Ital-
ian and the philology college in L’Aquila, in the 
Abruzzi, invited me to come and present it. There we 
were, my translator and I, in the aula magna of the 
university, sacrificing to the ritual of a bilingual 
reading, as is fitting. The translator, Maria Luisa Cal-
dognetto, first read the Italian version and I then 
continued in French, to allow the melody of the orig-
inal to be heard. Nothing but well-rehearsed time-
proven routine. Yet at a certain point, an inexplicable 
stir started up within the audience. The buzz of a 
bouquet of murmurs began to accompany the read-
ing, like a disagreeable echo, every time it was my 
turn. Feeling it would break my concentration, I 
raised my eyes to identify the source. And a student 
sitting in the front row took that opportunity to 
interrupt us. 
Signor Portante (he pronounced it Portante in 
the Italian way, accentuating the second sylla-
ble), lei è italiano, no? (You’re Italian, aren’t 
you?) 
I shook my head no, then corrected myself and 
nodded yes. 
Ma allora, perché non legge lei in italiano? (Then 
why don’t you yourself read in Italian.) 
The thought had not crossed our minds, the trans-
lator and I, when we started the presentation. For us 
it was normal for the author to read the original and 
the translator the translation. The student’s com-
ment troubled me. I looked questioningly at my 
translator, who answered with her own look that she 
didn’t mind switching roles. So we did. I took hers, 
and Italian verses started coming out of my mouth. 
The audience was won over. They were touched that 
one of their own, an expatriate, had returned to the 
homeland to read to them, in their language, verses 
written elsewhere.

The moment everything switched
Inside me, however, it happened very differently. The 
animal inside began protesting. I felt something 
unprecedented was taking place. I was moved, and 
couldn’t hold back tears. And then a great sadness 
crept in, and it would not go away. 
What had transpired? As I went along in my read-
ing, I discovered with astonishment that what I was 
in the process of reading wasn’t the translation of my 
text. That in fact, just before, when French words, 
therefore the original, were coming out of my mouth, 
this translation had done its work. That the transla-
tion was the genuine original version of my poems, 
and not the text I had written before and which in 
her mouth sounded suddenly like a translation. Eve-
rything had switched. 
Thanks to the interjection of that discerning stu-
dent, to whom I owe this revelation, I had just real-
ized that everything I believed up until then about 
my writing was false. That I was lying when I said I 
wrote in French. That what was claimed about me 
wasn’t true, namely that I was a Luxembourg writer 
of French expression, according to the accepted for-
mula. That like the whale, my writing, which appeared 
to be French, concealed within itself the lung of 
another language. That my writing took a French 
form, but had another breath, of which the text’s 
material nature was nothing more than a more or less 
effective translation. That I wrote in “strange 
language”.
Jean Portante, 
Italian and Luxembourgeois writer
© UNESCO/Stella Portante
Jean Portante during a recent lecture in San Demetrio 
(Italy).
