Why have you gone from the immensity of the uni-
verse to the fragility of the earth? 
Because if astronomy teaches us how we came to 
exist on earth, ecology teaches us how we can stay 
here. We know the wonders of the stars and the gal-
axies, which are linked to our past and our presence 
here – atoms that are formed in the stars and so on – 
and we discover that our survival on earth is threat-
ened. How could one not be concerned? 
People often say to me “Before, you talked about 
galaxies, you made us dream, now you’re telling us 
unpleasant facts.” I answer that we have to be real-
ists. We can’t spend our time dreaming. We can’t play 
ostrich. We need solid knowledge of the situation on 
earth to know what to do. 
I came to the issue of the environment gradually. 
During the lectures I gave in the 1980s, I started 
bringing up the problem, which became more and 
more present as time went by, until it became a cru-
cial issue. But I still give lectures about astronomy 
too. 
I try to speak usefully. That is to say, not to 
preach to the converted, but to address groups that 
are less involved in environmental issues. I’ve given 
lectures to real estate agents, for instance, and nota-
ries, truck drivers….They’re flabbergasted when you 
explain to them what’s going on. 
Are you alarmed? 
Not as much as I was a few years ago. But there’s 
been such a change all over the world that today I’m 
more encouraged. I’m often asked if I’m an optimist 
or a pessimist. I answer with a quote from Jean 
Monnet, one of the founders of Europe, at the time 
when nobody really believed in Europe. He used to 
Focus
Hubert reeves
Engaging geosciences in the service of humanity is the aim of the International Year 
of Planet Earth, launched on 12 February at UNESCO. This year, UNESCO and the 
International Union of Geological Sciences have taken the initiative to place sustainable 
development and the promotion of Earth Sciences (geology, geophysics, palaeontology, 
meteorology…) at the top of their priorities. This is a true pact for a better world. 
To announce the launch of this International Year, to which it will devote one of its 
next issues, the Courier interviewed the famous Canadian (Québécois) astrophysicist 
Hubert Reeves
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
4
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
Hubert Reeves

say, “What’s important isn’t being optimistic or pes-
simistic, it’s being determined.” 
It has to be said that in the last two years, aware-
ness of environmental problems has come a long way, 
thanks to people like the American Al Gore (2007 
Nobel Peace Prize), the French ecologist Nicolas 
Hulot, whose le pacte écologique (ecological pact) 
obliged politicians to take positions, or the British 
economist Nicolas Stern, who evaluated the cost of 
global warming at several thousand billion dollars 
(Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change, 
2006).
In 2001, you became president of the ROC.
The “Rassemblement des Opposants à la Chasse” 
(Union of Opponents of Hunting) was founded in 
1976 by Théodore Monod, at a time when there were 
no controls at all on hunting in France. He was the 
president, and after he died in 2001, I was asked to 
replace him. The problems have since changed, and 
so have the aims, along with the organization’s name, 
which became the Ligue ROC pour la préservation de 
la faune sauvage (ROC league for the preservation of 
wildlife). 
Today we’re very concerned by the disappearance 
of natural habitats and by pesticides, which contrib-
ute to what is called “biodiversity erosion”. The speed 
at which we are exterminating animal and plant spe-
cies represents one of the most disturbing aspects. 
In nature, species are not independent. Each disap-
pearance of a species causes that of many others and 
thus weakens the ecosystem. 
A very striking example is bees. The rapid disap-
pearance of bees causes a decrease in tree pollina-
tion. And without pollination, there’s no fruit. And 
fruit contributes in an essential way to the survival 
of humanity. 
When one element in life’s edifice - built over mil-
lions of years, whose solidity rests on the interde-
pendency of species – disappears, the whole is 
impoverished. Biodiversity, we have to stress this, is 
our guarantee of survival. 
Do you think political decision-makers are taking 
action quickly enough? 
The “Grenelle de l’environnement” (French govern-
ment forum on the environment) held last October in 
France is a good example. French President Nicholas 
Sarkozy promised it and he did it. It’s not every day 
politicians keep their pre-election promises. 
The originality of Grenelle was to bring together 
partners with opposing convictions: for example, 
farmers who defend agriculture relying heavily on 
pesticides, and environmental groups in the name of 
productivisme. This Grenelle represents real progress. 
I have reasons to believe that there will even be 
action to follow the words. Because fundamentally 
people aren’t crazy. And even those who couldn’t care 
less about butterflies or wildflowers dying out are 
beginning to understand that if they don’t invest 
now in positive action, it will cost them a lot more in 
the future.
© Stock.xchng/Terri Heisele
The rapid disappearance of bees causes a decrease in tree 
pollination.

And in other countries?
The United States are really on the move. George 
Bush blocked everything, but states such as Califor-
nia or those in New England have become extremely 
“green”. In Europe, the countries in the North are 
generally much more active. France is waking up, 
Spain is starting to move. But what’s very important 
is that China is also beginning to react. Meanwhile 
we don’t have very good news from India, but I think 
it will come because once again people do realize 
what’s going on. 
Is it utopian to imagine a Grenelle on an interna-
tional scale, organized by UNESCO, for instance? 
That would be brilliant if governments would listen 
to constituents of civil societies so that they can 
participate in the world’s evolution, and why not 
overseen by UNESCO. 
And to end the conversation on another seemingly 
utopian subject: do you believe there’s another 
planet that will welcome humanity if we destroy 
ours? 
I have no idea. There are people who believe that if 
things get too bad on earth, we’ll go to another 
planet. For me, that’s not a good solution, because if 
we turn out to be incapable of safeguarding our 
planet, we will only be transporting our problems to 
another one.
© Flickr/Jens Trebtow
A truck on a road in China. The future of the earth is everyone’s 
concern!
