Landmarks
the little leaf 
singing its country
Considered one of the greatest writers of 
the French language, Congolese Gérald 
Félix-Tchicaya, alias Tchicaya U Tam’si 
(1931-1988) was an international civil 
servant at UNESCO from 1961 to 1985. 
Having come to France at the age of 16 
with his father, an elected deputy of 
Middle Congo, he was an activist for the 
independence of the Congo Republic. 
His pen-name means “little 
leaf singing its country”. © Éditions Seghers
Cover of Tchicaya U Tam’si ‘s last novel (1987).

As a tribute to our colleague, who died prematurely 
on 22 April 1988, we are publishing excerpts from an 
interview he gave French journalist Bernard Magnier 
on 21 December 1979 when he was a programme spe-
cialist in UNESCO’s education sector. 
Twenty-five years have gone by since the publica-
tion of your first collection [Le Mauvais Sang (Bad 
Blood) Paris, P. J. Oswald, 1955]. How do you view 
this last quarter-century in African literary 
creation? 
From the perspective of Africa, I would have a lot of 
difficulty, but I can try as far as my own country is 
concerned. 
This quarter-century has seen the blossoming of a 
large number of writers who published books either 
right before independence, or after. At the begin-
ning, the favorite genre was poetry. Only one author 
wrote prose, traditionally-inspired prose, and that 
was Jean Malonga. Between 1950 and 1960, the 
movement was launched with Jean Malonga, Sinda 
Maetial and then me. Then in 1960 there was Guy 
Menga, Sylvain Bemba, Henrio Lopes, Théophile 
Obenga, etc. A blossoming of names. The magnitude 
of this phenomenon is rather surprising. Looking at 
the population, the number of writers is 
considerable. 
Sony Labou Tansi has just now published a high 
quality novel La Vie et demie (Life and a half), Paris, 
Seuil, 1979]. Finally, another generation with a heap 
of manuscripts that aren’t second-rate are waiting to 
be published. In all the results are quite positive. 
These writers belong to a movement that runs paral-
lel to “negritude”. It has to do with taking responsi-
bility for oneself and even an acerbic gaze on the 
country, the inner country. 
What was your own itinerary during this period? 
My own itinerary is marked out by the books I pub-
lished whose titles are significant. In 1955, bad 
blood, that’s anxiety. In 1957, Feu de Brousse (Bush 
fire), that’s the fire of exorcism. In 1960, À Triche-
cœur, (Cheating heart), it’s compromise not as a cow-
ardly act but as the acceptance of the different parts 
of oneself without rejecting any. In 1962, Épitomé 
(Epitome), it’s a historical précis, almost a summary, 
which comes out at a turning point. 
Regarding the plays, whether it’s Le Zulu (The 
Zulu) or Le Destin glorieux du Maréchal Nnikon Nniku 
(The Glorious Destiny of Marshal Nnikon Nniku) 
[1979], it’s a reflection on power and construction 
that is being done or remains to be done.
There are two major themes in your work: women 
and the Congo. Through these themes, the reader 
perceives two kinds of suffering, two revolts. Don’t 
you envisage the Congo and women as two elements 
of yourself?
If I can get that across, I’ll have every reason to be 
satisfied. For the Congo, it’s been recognized. In con-
trast, I’ve been portrayed as a dreadful misogynist. I 
don’t know why. 
An anecdote: the first talk I ever gave, a very 
long time ago, was on the topic of woman, the mother 
and the “matrie”, that is to say the motherland rather 
than the “patrie”, fatherland. The fatherland is the 
sword. The motherland is love. That’s why Le Ventre 
[The Belly, poetry, 1964] is a return to maternal 
love. 
The Congo is also a quest for identity, it’s the 
circle in which I’m trying to find myself. 
Isn’t the quest for identity a political quest? 
But the human quest is a political quest, to the 
degree that human beings are fundamentally gregari-
ous. The fundamental gregariousness is sociability; 
it’s rejecting the other’s refusal. 
© UNESCO/Fiona Rya
African sand painting.

The Congo is therefore very close 
to you through your work, yet you 
live in Paris. How do you accept 
this distance? 
You know, I see better from far 
away. Needless to say if I hadn’t 
had this distance, I would have 
had this perception. Of course I 
perceive and I would like to 
embrace. That’s where suffering 
begins. Every day I would like to 
go back, but disenchantment 
begins every time I return because 
the dream always goes beyond the 
reality. 
Christ is an important character 
in your works. Is he a symbol? 
Yes. He’s a multiple symbol. He’s 
the symbol of brotherhood fore-
told and not accepted by others. 
Christ is also a prototype of the 
colonized.
Hasn’t he been used as a prototype of the 
colonizers?
One uses him to be a colonizer. Brotherhood is also a 
form of colonization. If you force someone to be your 
friend, you make him your slave. If you respect the 
other’s freedom and choice, there is no longer any 
constraint or slavery, there is only the expression of 
this brotherhood. 
In your poems you evoke suffering, revolt, but also 
forgiveness…. 
I say, “I will no longer see my blood on their hands. 
I forget I’m black to forgive the world of this.” This is 
the origin of those lines: I was a journalist in the 
1950s and I had a French woman friend, a political 
journalist. Every time there was a political event in 
Africa, she questioned me. I was impassive, almost 
blasé, indifferent. One day, she said to me, “Gérald, 
one would think you’re forgetting you’re black!” I 
replied, “If I had to think about being black all the 
time, I couldn’t look you in the face.” That’s why I 
wrote those lines. 
4 If I have to keep thinking 
endlessly about the millions and 
millions of black people who 
ended up in the Atlantic, those 
who suffered in the New World 
and all those who were bled to 
death on the continent, I’d never 
be able to sleep again. 
Is forgiving necessar ily 
forgetting? 
The idea of forgiving is under-
pinned by that of forgetting. If 
you don’t forget, you can’t for-
give properly, you’ll always be 
obsessed by revenge. 
You’re very ready to use humor. 
Comic relief but also disturbing 
humor… 
Yes, I say “I have the laugh that 
kills”. In Le Destin glorieux du 
Maréchal Nnikon Nniku, it ’s 
laughter that expels, that 
relieves tension and liberates. Humor preserves you. 
It makes you peaceful. It makes things relative, quite 
rightly so, to temper excessive rage, to recharge your 
energy. 
Humor is our weapon, we who are weak. The weak 
laugh at themselves to disarm their foes. That’s what 
(French writer) André Schwarz-Bart said when I inter-
viewed him after he’d won the Goncourt literary prize 
[1959]. Humor is a weapon. 
Like poetry… 
Possibly… 
You don’t think of yourself as a militant? 
I consider myself committed. I don’t think there’s 
any literature that isn’t. What is the meaning of my 
commitment? Effectively everything said that goes 
to another carries a message, and that message con-
tains a minimum of effectiveness. Humor is militant. 
Poetry is militant. Every action that projects the 
consciousness of being is militant. 
Tchicaya U Tam’si is 
the author of numerous 
collections of poems 
including Le Mauvais 
Sang (Bad Blood, 1955) 
and Épitomé (Epitome, 
1962), of novels including 
Les Cancrelats (The 
Cockroaches, 1980), and 
of plays : Le Zulu (The 
Zulu) followed by Le Destin 
glorieux du maréchal 
Nnikon Nniku, prince qu’on 
sort (Glorious Destiny of 
Marshal Nnikon Nniku, 
1979).
