These are “extraordinary times”. 
In just a matter of weeks, seve-
ral western countries have pulled 
together multi-billion-dollar bailout 
packages for their ailing banking 
systems, thus keeping the wheels of 
the global economy in motion. 
Without question, political leaders 
needed to act decisively and act 
now or risk catastrophic financial 
implications. 
The same determination, says the 
2009 Education for All Global 
Monitoring Report, Overcoming ine-
quality: why governance matters, is 
now needed to tackle an equally seri-
ous and no less urgent development 
challenge – that of ensuring social 
justice, fairness and the right to edu-
cational opportunity for the world’s 
most vulnerable population groups. 
“When financial systems fail, the 
consequences are highly visible and 
governments act,” UNESCO’s Director 
General Koïchiro Maatsura has com-
mented. Yet “…when education sys-
tems fail the consequences are…no 
less real. Unequal opportunities for 
education fuel poverty, hunger, and 
child mortality and reduce prospects 
for economic growth.” 
The extent of global inequality in 
educational opportunity should give 
policymakers pause for thought. 
While over a third of children in rich 
countries complete university, a 
much smaller share even completes 
primary education in much of sub-
Saharan Africa (with just 5% reach-
ing university level). One in three 
children in developing countries (193 
million in total) reach primary school 
age suffering from malnutrition and 
impaired cognitive growth – a figure 
that rises to over 40% in parts of 
South Asia. 
National disparities mirror global 
inequalities. In Peru and the 
Philippines, children in the poorest 
20% of the population receive 5 
years less education than their peers 
from the wealthiest families. But 
wealth is not the only marker for 
marginalization and disadvantage. 
Other deeply entrenched barriers 
result from geographical accessibility 
to schooling, gender, language and 
ethnicity. In Senegal, for example, 
children in urban areas are twice as 
likely to be in school as those living 
in rural areas.
The picture, of course, is not all bleak 
and this year’s Global Monitoring 
Report highlights some impressive 
national and regional performances. 
Tanzania and Ethiopia have both 
reduced the number of children out 
of school by over 3 million. In a 
region marked by deep gender ine-
qualities, Bangladesh now has as 
many girls as boys reaching second-
ary school. In Latin America, several 
countries are enrolling and keeping 
more children in schools through 
innovative cash transfer programmes 
for the poorest households,  … 
Education: thE othEr global EmErgEncy
The Global Monitoring Report Team
Western countries have pulled together multi-billion-dollar plans to save 
their banking systems from catastrophe. The same determination, says the 
2009 Education for All Global Monitoring Report, Overcoming inequality: why 
governance matters, is needed to tackle failing education systems.
Oportunidades is the prinicipal anti-poverty program of the Mexican 
government.  © UNESCO/José Gabriel Ruiz Lembo

communities, they did not back this 
drive with measures to facilitate real 
participation. 
Neither have competition—and its 
corollary, choice—proved to be the 
antidote for the failings of public 
education systems, as many 
expected. Even in the United States, 
where the private and civil society 
sectors have been contracted into 
the management of public school 
systems under various forms of pub-
lic-private partnership, the gains to 
efficiency and education perform-
ance from the creation of charter 
schools, for example, have been 
uneven and remain inconclusive. 
In this year’s Global Monitoring 
Report, we especially take the aid 
community to task for its “collective 
failure” to deliver on development 
commitments. Many countries’ aid 
disbursements to basic education 
have stagnated since 2004. While 
countries such as the Netherlands 
and the United Kingdom still allocate 
over 60% of their aid to basic educa-
tion in low-income countries, … continued on page 11
issues are not reaching the levels of 
impact desired. In fact the evidence 
shows that applying education blue-
prints uncritically from the north, a 
practice frequently encouraged by 
the development community, will not 
lead to long term improvements in 
areas such as education resource 
allocation, school management and 
teacher recruitment. 
A perfect example relates to reforms 
surrounding the decentralization of 
national education systems in devel-
oping countries. In the 1990s, such 
reforms undoubtedly brought educa-
tion planning closer to school com-
munities around the world. However 
at a time when many countries were 
coping with a massive expansion in 
education provision, financial decen-
tralisation left different regions with 
even less resources to fund learning 
resources, school maintenance and 
the teaching profession. And while 
central and local governments sup-
ported the idea of devolving author-
ity and decision-making to parents, 
schools and communities, especially 
those lacking voice in the poorest 
… with payments made condi-
tional on school attendance and 
health visits. Most remarkably, 
Mexico’s Oportunidades programme, 
one of the country’s largest educa-
tion schemes, is now being pilot 
tested in the New York City school 
system. 
Nevertheless, the overall figures 
speak for themselves. An estimated 
75 million children of primary school 
age world wide are currently out of 
school with partial projections sug-
gesting that at least 29 million chil-
dren will still be missing out on their 
right to an education in 2015. A fur-
ther 776 million adults, or 16% of 
the world’s population, lack even 
basic literacy skills. Two-thirds of 
these are women. 
Without concerted and sustained 
action, the international develop-
ment target of universal primary 
education by 2015 will move even 
further out of reach. 
More of the same will simply not do. 
That is why the way in which educa-
tion systems are managed, policies 
developed, and resources allocated 
is in the political spotlight. ‘Good 
governance’ has become a rallying 
call, with decentralisation, the devo-
lution of authority to parents and 
schools, and choice and competition 
recurrent themes in policy debates. 
But according to the Global 
Monitoring Report, governance 
reforms all too often fail to tackle 
the inequalities that are holding back 
education for all.
Wide sweeping education reforms 
that give but a passing nod to local 
context, institutional capacity 
requirements and equity-related 
North Westminster School, United Kingdom.  © UNESCO/Niamh Burke

… France allocates only 12% of 
its total development assistance in 
this area and Germany just 7%. 
Multilateral aid frameworks for sup-
porting Education for All, such as the 
EFA Fast Track Initiative, are also 
failing to meet expectations. 
Inadequate donor support means 
that countries with approved plans 
will face an FTI shortfall of US$2.2 
billion by 2010. 
The circumstances into which chil-
dren are born, their gender, the 
wealth of their parents, their lan-
guage or the colour of their skin 
should no longer define their educa-
tional opportunities and ending 
inequality’s “lottery by birth” is per-
haps one the greatest global chal-
lenges of the 21st century. The 
challenge is one that concerns all 
nations, since in a globalized world 
poverty and suffering do not remain 
confined within borders, but spill 
over in the form of conflict for 
scarce resources, mass migration 
and environmental degradation. 
The response to the financial crisis 
demonstrates what governments can 
accomplish when faced with 
“extraordinary times”. But if they 
carry on failing to tackle deep and 
persistent inequalities in education, 
targets set by the international 
community will be missed – in some 
cases by spectacular margins. Most 
importantly, millions of children 
around the world will continue to be 
consigned to lives of poverty and 
diminished opportunity.   
