three Armenian jewels in Iran
The northwest provinces in Iran have sheltered a number of Armenian churches for several 
centuries. As time went by, cultural interpenetration left there an astonishing mixture of 
symbols within the typically Armenian 
architecture. Three monastic ensembles in 
this region were inscribed this year on the 
World Heritage List.
The place, according to legend, of the apostle Thad-
deus’s martyrdom in the first century A.D., the mon-
astery of Saint Thaddeus of Artaz (Artazi Sourb T’adei 
vank’) every summer brings together thousands of 
pilgrims. It is enthroned, majestic and solitary, in 
the lunar landscape of the Maku valley, on a promon-
tory at an altitude of 2,200 metres, where Saint Gre-
gory, father of the Armenian church, founded a place 
of worship in the 4th century. So much for legend. 4
© Arthur Guevorkian
The two churches of Saint Thaddeus monastery.
Saint thaddeus of Artaz
First mentioned in records in the 12th century, the Saint Thaddeus monastery was 
destroyed in 1319 by an earthquake. The present condition of the monuments is the result 
of two restoration and construction campaigns in the 17th and 19th centuries. The mon-
astery is composed of two adjoining churches, a porch and monastic buildings aligned 
along the vast quadrilateral inner courtyard with towers. The enclosure is prolonged to 
the west by a large courtyard for the use of pilgrims and visitors, while several chapels are 
set on surrounding hills. 
Undated, but typical of the Armenian Middle Ages, the western church, referred to as “Black”, was proba-
bly built in 1329. It has lost its western arm, destroyed when the main church was built. A large prominent 
cross within the dome and a cross vault in the apse essentially make up its interior decoration, the sobriety 
of which stands out against the opulence of its exterior ornaments. Creating a lively contrast with the dark 
grey basalt covering the facades, blocks of pale beige limestone cover the cupola and the roof. They are also 
arranged in horizontal strips on the drum (cylinder on which the cupola rests) and form large ornamental 

As for history, it tells us that Saint Thaddeus was 
the seat of the Armenian diocese in the 10th cen-
tury; it endured the Mongol invasions in the 13th 
century; in the following century, it was held by the 
Unitors, who wanted to unite the Armenian and 
Roman churches; it was pillaged by the Persian Qadjar 
dynasty at the end of the 1700s and became a centre 
of resistance against the Ottomans at the dawn of 
the 20th century. 
This major site of the Armenian church has just 
been inscribed, along with Saint Stepanos and Dzord-
zor, on the World Heritage List. It constitutes a 
remarkable artefact of Armenian culture in the 
region, which was one of the most prosperous and 
coveted in this part of the world, as well as one of 
the most fertile in cultural exchange. 
That explains the astonishing mixture of styles in 
the two churches of Saint Thaddeus monastery: the 
medieval “Black Church”, from which the little 
 neighbouring village got its name, Quara-Kelisa 
(“black church” in Turkish), and the “White Church”, 
built in the 19th century on the model of Echmiatsin 
(a World Heritage site since 2000), close to Arme-
nia’s capital Yerevan.
With their pyramidal domes on polygonal drums, 
arches, niches and sculpted decorations in horizontal 
bands, these two central-domed cross-hall churches 
are emblematic of Armenian architecture, of which 
St Stepanos of Darresham (Dara chambi Sourb Ste-
pannos Nakhavka), main church of the second monas-
tic ensemble to be inscribed as world heritage, 
provides another eloquent illustration. 
An impressive building in a spectacular landscape 
– the description briefly sums up this site, located 
east of Saint Thaddeus, in the gorges of the river 
Araxe. Reaching its apogee in the 14th century, the 
monastery today shares the vestiges of its former 
glory with Yerevan and Venice, where a portion of 
compositions on the facades. Typical of the 17th cen-
tury, the decoration is probably the result of recon-
struction carried out between 1680 and 1685. 
Distinctly larger, the main “white” church was 
built between 1810 and 1830 in pale beige limestone. 
It is bathed in light, thanks to the 12 windows cut 
into the drum of its dome. Its distinctive character-
istics are its floor plan inspired by Echmiatsin (near 
Yerevan, Armenian capital) and its elaborate decora-
tively sculpted exterior, the prototype of which is 
Aghtamar’s Holy Cross church on Lake Van in Turkey. 
The iconography of its relief sculptures testifies to 
an astonishing diversity of cultural influences. The 
first register, comprised of flat niches, harbours 
saintly knights, crosses, stylized cypresses in the Turkish and Iranian style, but also the Iranian emblem of a 
rising sun and a lion. Above the niches runs a double frieze of foliated scrolls emerging from vases, a motif 
of Western origin found frequently not only in Armenia but also Turkey and Iran in the late Middle Ages. The 
foliage in the upper row surrounds a multitude of scenes of hunting and rural life, battles, images of real and 
imaginary animals, as well as scenes from Iranian poetry and mythology. In the upper register can be identi-
fied portraits, based for the most part on Western models, of Moses, King David, the Virgin Mary, John the 
Baptist, Saint Gregory the Enlightener and the archbishop Simeon carrying the model of the church. 
Restoration work was undertaken with UNESCO’s support in 1972 and 1973, following an earthquake in 
1940 that seriously damaged the buildings. The work continued regularly until 2001, when an overall conser-
vation programme was established.
© UNESCO/Armenia A. Prepis
Detail from the western facade of the church, Saint Stepanos 
monastery.
4
4

the iconography and literature produced behind its 
walls is now housed. 
Its hardest times came in the 11th and 12th cen-
turies, during the wars between Byzantium and the 
Seldjukids, and in the 13th and 14th centuries under 
Mongol domination, and 300 years later, when Shah 
Abbas decided to “clear” the border area, causing the 
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Armenians 
towards central Iran. 
The monastery suffered by human hand but also 
because of nature. It had to be rebuilt several times. 
It was destroyed, as was Saint Thaddeus, by the 1319 
earthquake, and, along with all buildings from 
4
4
St Stepanos of Darresham
The Monastery of St Stepanos (Stephen) exists in 10th cen-
tury records, but the present constructions date from the 17th 
and 19th centuries. The main church was built between 1643 
and 1655, commissioned by the bishop Hakob of Djulfa, future 
Patriarch. It is one of the most eloquent illustrations of the 
17th century Armenian architectural renaissance, period in 
which it was rebuilt.
Its boundaries marked by a quadrilateral enclosure with round towers, 
the complex comprises two courtyards. The raised southern courtyard is 
surrounded by monastic buildings, while the northern courtyard encloses 
the main church, flanked with a chapel-arcade and a bell tower. The build-
ings are covered in slabs of ochre and brown limestone in checkerboard 
pattern. 
Twenty-five metres high, the church conforms to a design that is old-
fashioned for its time: a tetraconch or triple apse in the form of a clover 
within a rectangle. The apse is flanked by two large two-story chapels. The 
western side contains a tribune, a structure rarely found in Armenian architecture. The slightly curved form 
of the arches, the alveoles in the vaults of niches and the plant motifs that appear around cherubs on the 
frescoes painted in 1826 are the fruit of Iranian influence. 
Outside, the facades carry sculpted representations of the Virgin and Child, the Crucifixion, the Annuncia-
tion, the Resurrection and the stoning of St Stephen. But they are also interspersed with a Seljukid chain 
pattern, as frequent in medieval Armenian art as it is typical of Muslim ornamentation. 
Crowned with an umbrella-shaped dome, its drum has 16 facets, one for each apostle in addition to God, 
the Virgin, St John the Baptist and St Gregory the Enlightener. Each fold of the umbrella is topped by a stone 
cross and at its narrow tip ends in the head of a man or an animal.
© Arthur Guevorkian
Cupola typical of Armenian architecture.
© UNESCO/Armenia/A. Prepis
In the gorges of the Araks River, St 
Stepanos monastery has resisted 
history’s vicissitudes for centuries.

ancient Armenia with its extremely harsh weather, it 
is very vulnerable to climate variations. The alluvial 
ground represents another constant threat to the St 
Stepanos (Stephen) Monastery. But constant conser-
vation work prolongs its existence.
A management plan for the three monastic ensem-
bles was established in 2001, following up the con-
servation that began in the 1970s. 
Twenty years ago, the little Holy-Mother-of-God 
chapel (Sourb Astvatzatzin), the only remnant of the 
famous Dzordzor monastery, demolished at the time 
of Shah Abbas in the early 17th century, was saved 
from certain death. Left alone for 300 years in the 
valley of the Makuchay river, it was fated to disap-
pear too when the Iranian government decided to 
build a dam. But it was dismantled and rebuilt 600 
metres away, with the support of the Armenian 
church. All the chapel’s stones were numbered and 4
4
© UNESCO/Armenia/A. Prepis
The chapel of Dzordzor has a strikingly vivid outline.
holy-mother-of-god of Dzordzor
Built out of carefully carved limestone 
blocks, with a dome above a cross that is 
slightly elongated from west to east, typi-
cal of Armenian architecture, the Dzordzor 
chapel’s lively silhouette is striking. Topped 
by a cupola resting on a 16-sided drum, it 
features a series of layers of stones that are 
lower and darker than the others, giving its 
facades an unusual rhythm. On the whole, 
however, its exterior decoration is quite 
austere. On its western façade it is limited 
to a strip of moulding that surrounds the 
door and forms a broken arch above the 
tympanum. 
In danger of vanishing underwater due to the con-
struction of a dam, the chapel was moved a distance 
of 600 metres upstream in 1987-1988. A restoration, notably of the umbrella dome, was undertaken at the 
same time. 
Undated, the Dzordzor chapel has been attributed by some specialists to the 9th or 10th century, and by 
others to the 14th century, high point in the history of the monastery of which it is the only vestige.
© Arthur Guevorkian
Work on Dzordzor chapel.
those scattered on the ground reassembled, so that 
out of the 1548 stones, only 250 (lighter in colour) 
do not come from the original construction. 

13 The UNESCO Courier • 2008 • Number 6

