the people who made history dance
The 23rd of August has been proclaimed 
“International Day for the Remembrance 
of the Slave Trade and its Abolition”. As 
the Director-General of UNESCO, Koïchiro 
Matsuura, said in 2004, “Facing us 
with the banality of evil, it forces us 
to reflect on the state of our rights and 
freedoms in the present.” That year, 
the International Year Commemorating 
the Struggle Against Slavery and its 
Abolition, marked the bicentennial of the 
proclamation of the first black state, Haiti.
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
René Depestre at UNESCO, 2006.

of Negro spirituals, jazz, blues – all precursors of the 
movements that began to globalize planetary 
sensibilities. 
We did not collapse into endless bitterness, into 
revenge and feuds, into score-settling, as in Islamist 
fundamentalism today, turned into the archetypal 
model of the unhappy consciousness in a tailspin. 
We got off easy, because we were able to change 
the words of history, the words of the plantation, 
the words of cotton and sugar and coffee and spices, 
into supreme vitality! Our approach was dynamic, 
not mental. The mental one would have plunged us 
into Christian moroseness, into resignation.
We’re not out of the woods yet
The truth is their bodies were attacked, not only 
because they were reduced to slavery – complete lack 
of freedom for the body – not only because they 
were subjected to onerous farm work, but also 
because the colour of their skin was disqualified, 
given a pejorative, denigrating, slanderous meaning. 
An issue was introduced into the social debate that 
did not exist in the slavery of antiquity. During the 
time of the slave trade, the slave was not only 
reduced to the state of beast of burden, but because 
of his colour, he deserved his servile fate. That is 
extremely serious. 
The so-called Whites could not imagine to what 
degree adding this other very frustrating psychologi-
cal dimension to the slavery dimension would create 
The UNESCO Courier takes part in the celebration of 
the Day by running unpublished excerpts from an 
interview Haitian writer René Depestre gave to 
 Jasmina Šopova on 25 September 2006 at UNESCO. 
Africans who were deported to America by the 
slave trade, who were wrenched from their traditional 
cultures and ethnic distinctions and found them-
selves on plantations, had lost their bearings. But 
they recreated them in suffering, in servile work, in 
extraordinarily precarious circumstances, thus 
becoming the founders of new cultures in the Carib-
bean. These cultures took on their own directions, 
separating themselves from the African and European 
heritage they synthesized. 
When they had just got off the slave ship and 
they were offered only the ideology of Christianity, 
they took from it what suited them and kept part of 
their own religious tradition. Had they only accepted 
Christianity pure and simple, they would have become 
resigned to their lot, and waited for a better one in 
heaven. Instead they put drumming in their prayers 
and from that joyful cultures emerged, based on 
dancing and singing and joie de vivre. They made 
history dance.
Joy against the tailspin  
of unhappiness
From this grew the extraordinary musical forms of 
Brazil, the Caribbean, Venezuela. This was the source 
4
© UNESCO/Michel Claude
Voodoo dances around the fire, Haïti.
© NESCO/Michel Ravassard
20 March 2004: celebration at UNESCO of International  
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 4

existential conflicts and influence the idea slaves 
developed of themselves and their place in the human 
species. By thus changing the level of the relation-
ship of master and slave, which was already an 
 archetypal relationship in the history of humanity, 
we complicated things enormously, which is why 
we’re not quite out of the woods yet.
