the “Doctor Prince”
Born two hundred years ago, Prince Wonsa Dhiraj Sanid, son of King Rama II of Thailand 
(1809-1824), devoted his life to promoting peace, health and culture for the benefit of 
his country. In recognition of his achievements, UNESCO joins in the celebration of the 
anniversary of his birth. He is the 17th Thai national to receive this honour.
Phra Chao Barommawongse Ther Krom Luang Wongsa 
Dhiraj Sanid (H.R.H. Prince Wongsa Dhiraj Snid) (1808-
1871) was a son of King Rama II (1809-1824), whose 
contribution in political, scientific, and cultural fields 
was very beneficial for Thailand. Without prejudice, he 
learned from foreign missionaries and used their 
knowledge to help his countrymen. He was hailed a 
great modernist in the midst of the royal family. 
Prince Wongsa Dhiraj Snid dedicated most of his 
life to negotiating for Thailand’s peace and prosper-
ity. His mastery of English, together with his diplo-
matic skill, made him the most important prince in 
Thailand’s international context during the reign of 
his brother King Rama IV (1851-1868). 
Colonialism in the nineteenth century motivated 
European countries to acquire lands in Southeast Asia. 4

Thailand, or Siam, was not an exception. Prince Wongsa 
Dhiraj Snid was appointed by King Rama IV head of 
Siam’s negotiation team to sign several treaties with 
western countries, including Britain, France, Prussia, 
Denmark, and United States. The treaties, signed under 
his supervision, were aimed at tightening the politi-
cal, legal and free trade links between Siam and other 
countries. His ability to negotiate led to the success 
of several agreements, creating the balance of power 
between each western state and Siam. This was not 
only the key to help maintain peace but also to open 
the country to the world for modernization.
Diplomat, scientist and poet
Committed to scientific development, Prince Wongsa 
Dhiraj Snid was the first Thai doctor who introduced 
quinine, a western medicine for curing malaria, and 
used it successfully on Thai patients. His mother, 
Chao Chom Marnda Prang (Yai) was a descendant of 
the Bangchang Royal Family, whose role was to pre-
serve and transmit traditional Thai medicine. He 
acquired his knowledge of western medicine from 
missionaries living in Thailand in the early Chakri 
Dynasty (1782-1851). During the reign of King Rama 
III (1824-1851), also his brother, the Prince was 
appointed chief of the Krom Mor Luang department 
(the Office of Royal Medicine) and served as King 
Rama IV’s personal doctor. Foreigners in Thailand 
called him “The Doctor Prince”. 
The Prince also focused his attention on Thai tra-
ditional medicine. He studied the properties of 166 
herb types and wrote the first Thai traditional herbal 
medicine textbook. The book, reprinted several times 
(1922, 1984, 1991 and 2003), can be found at the 
Thapra Palace Library, Silpakorn university, in Bang-
kok. Widely recognized for his medical skills, he was 
invited by many European medical institutes to be an 
active member. He also received a Certificate of Phy-
sician from the New York Academy, being the first 
Thai doctor who obtained this honour. 
At the same time, Prince Wongsa Dhiraj Snid played 
a predominant role in the literary context. He edited 
Jinda Manee, a grammar-book of the Thai language 
inherited from the Ayutthaya period. During the reign 
of King Rama V, the book was included as the first 
grammar textbook in the nation-wide school curricu-
lum. He revised the Annals of Ayutthaya, (Royal Auto-
graph Edition) considered the first Thai history book 
which was reprinted in 2005. He composed Thai poems 
such as Pleng Yao Samchai and Nirat Phra Pathom 
Pathon, which were published in 1921 and 1922 
respectively. His literary works are kept at the Chu-
lalongkorn University Library, in Bangkok.
Watchara Saengsrisin, 
journalist at The Nation (Thaïland)
4
Prince Wongsa Dhiraj Sanid.
