What was the prevalent feeling 
when the Dec l a r a t ion was 
adopted? 
Relief. Don’t forget we were already 
in the midst of growing opposition 
between the United States and the 
Soviet Union. Out of the first 50 
countries who were members of the 
United Nations, 30 were Western. 
The battle was by no means already 
won. There were seven abstentions. 
As only the positive or negative 
votes were counted, the Declaration 
was adopted by consensus. The third 
UN general assembly (which adopted 
the Declaration) was held in Paris, 
at the Palais de Chaillot, by chance. 
The building set to be the Manhat­
tan headquarters was still under 
construction. The press was quite 
enthusiastic, but it didn’t pay much 
attention to what was going on at 
the UN. Particularly in the European 
countr ies, which were rather 
nationalist.
And the preliminary meetings?
The first meeting of the nucleus 
committee was held in early 1946 in 
Manhattan. As for the secretariat, it 
was housed in a disaffected aero­
nautics factory on Long Island. 
Sometimes we met in New York, 
other times in Geneva. René Cassin 
from France was one of the driving 
forces behind the preparation. It was 
thanks  to him we were able to draft 
a text that was ambitious and unique 
in the history of international texts. 
We were working under the authority 
of Henri Laugier (France) who was 
the deputy secretary general for 
social issues and  
Human rigHts are 
inalienable and 
indivisible
Stéphane Hessel, French-German diplomat and 
writer, participated in the great adventure that 
was the drafting of the 1948 Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. Hessel, a concentration camp 
survivor, explains how the document is unique 
and why it must remain universal – but also why 
it might not be adopted today.
Stéphane Hessel answers questions from  
Vincent Noce, French journalist.
Stéphane Hessel at UNESCO (2008). 
© UNESCO/D. Bijeljac
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in Paris,  
at the Palais de Chaillot, in 1948. © UN

human rights, and John Hum­
phrey from Canada, director of 
human rights, who had only one arm. 
It gave our committee a certain aura, 
because people thought he was a 
war invalid (note, his arm had been 
amputated when he was a child). 
Afterwards, when the Human Rights 
Commission was set up in 1947, it 
took over. It was chaired by Eleanor 
Roosevelt, who played a very active 
role. 
It should be noted that participants 
did not represent their governments. 
They were suggested by their govern­
ments, according to their capacity, 
and picked by the secretary general. 
It gave us great freedom, although 
we were careful not to make things 
difficult for the states. René Cassin 
never had to report to the French 
government. 
As for me, I was called in February 
1946 to become Henri Laugier’s cabi­
net director, which led me to get 
actively involved in these prepara­
tions. I stayed at the UN for four 
years. It was an extraordinary period 
of expansion and innovation to make 
it the fine edifice it became. 
There were a few thorny issues in the 
committee, like the place of trust 
territories. We were still in the time 
of the Empires. But the main tension 
was between the West’s emphasis on 
freedoms, versus the East’s prefer­
ence for economic and social rights. 
A “unique declaration”, you said? 
Already in the preamble, it stipula­
tes the universal right to human 
dignity. That was our objective, after 
all the tragedies we’d lived through, 
from Auschwitz to Hiroshima… The 
states found themselves under the 
pleasure of power, but to guarantee 
the exercise of a democratic society. 
We were able to declare that govern­
ments could be held responsible for 
the rights of their citizens. 
We had af f irmed the universal 
responsibility of human rights. The 
word “universal” is obv iously 
fundamental.
How could the Khmer Rouge hold a 
seat in the United Nations?
There were no criteria for admission 
to the UN, like the ones Europeans 
are imposing today on new European 
Union members. States that had 
gained independence automatically 
became members. It was inevitable, 
but it had consequences.
The UN wager was the following: 
countries must come in, and once 
they were in, they had to be led to 
respect human rights.    
unquestionable leadership of Roose­
velt in a strong institution that 
aff irmed the person’s rights and 
freedoms. 
The League of Nations (forerunner of 
the UN) had peacekeeping as its 
goal, but it did not concern itself 
with individuals. As for the 1789 
Declaration of the Rights of Man and 
of the Citizen, its purpose was to 
protect the citizen against the arbi­
trariness of royal power. The whole 
ideology of human rights was thus 
positioned between power and those 
it dominated. But to extend this pro­
tection to an international level, and 
even universal, that was very bold. 
This was the innovation: we are 
responsible for human dignity and 
the rights of the person. It was 
democracy’s catechism. In other 
words, we do not govern for the 
Genocide museum in Phnom Penh (Cambodia). 
© Arjun Purkayastha

 Conflict - fundamental con-
flict - therefore exists between 
diplomacy for peace and peace for 
human rights. 
These are concessions made to coop­
eration. When we talk about diplo­
macy for human rights, of course it 
implies obtaining states’ consent. 
The declaration is not a legally bin­
ding treaty, even though it was fol­
lowed by two pacts that are legal 
instruments ratified by states (note, 
the pact concerning civic and politi­
cal rights and the pact covering eco­
nomic, social and cultural rights 
adopted by the UN General Assembly 
in 1966). We can incite states to 
ratify pacts, we can say to them 
watch out! We’ll br ing charges 
against you to the Human Rights 
Commission. But there have been no 
exclusions with the exception of 
South Africa, for apartheid. 
Some criticize human rights rheto-
ric for its strictly western values. 
Human rights are inalienable and 
indivisible. We must absolutely resist 
relativism. We cannot plead cultural 
differences to deny them. Moreover, 
western countries can be just as 
guilty, look at the prisons in Guanta­
namo and Abu Ghraib. It isn’t 
because they’re western that they’re 
any less responsible. We have to 
remain faithful to the principle of 
universality – it is fundamental. 
We can wonder whether the Decla-
ration would have a chance of 
being adopted today as it was in 
1948. 
The circumstances aren’t conducive. 
The shock of the Second World War 
made possible such radical ambition. 
Yet we could have a comparable 
shock tomorrow, notably about 
saving the planet. Or wild financiali­
zation of the economy. If we were 
terrified by a worsening crisis, a text 
with the same range, about the envi­
ronment, for instance, could have 
the same chance of success. Whereas 
60 years ago we weren’t ready.  
