Following the 1616 fire, the city’s first parish 
church, La Parroquial, was rebuilt. It was moved from 
its original site facing the city council to a side of 
Arms Square. From then on, urban geography adopted 
the church as its core and the square as its centre. It 
was around the latter, renamed Agramante Park, that 
the most important government buildings were 
erected.
The city with  
the earthenware jars
Residential buildings definitely take up the most 
space within the central historical heritage, which is 
for sure the largest in Cuba. We must remember that 
in 1800, at the start of the 19th century, the Royal 
Justice Palace of Santo Domingo Island was trans-
ferred to Camagüey, when the former Spanish colony 
became French under the Treaty of Basel. As a result 
prominent families came to live in the city, giving 
impetus to majestic architecture with its own par-
ticularities, consisting mainly of what we call today 
As my friend the Cuban poet Roberto Méndez, a 
native of Camagüey, tells it, the indigenous chief 
Camagüebax welcomed the Spaniards with open arms 
when they arrived in 1514 in what they would call 
Villa Santa María del Puerto Príncipe. The chief gave 
them a ribbon of land stretched between the Tinima 
and Hatibonico rivers so they could settle. They, in 
exchange, murdered him and threw him off a moun-
taintop. Legend has it the land all around immedi-
ately turned red. 
That said, the capital of Cuba’s most extensive 
province, also called Camagüey, had to be re-founded 
several times in diverse circumstances down through 
history. First the indigenous people rose up against 
the conquistadores, then pirates attacked and finally 
in 1616 a dreadful fire reduced all the ecclesiastical 
archives to ashes. Difficult, then, to piece together 
the history of the city, which in the past was charac-
terized by narrow and sinuous street like a medieval 
town, in flagrant contrast to the rectangular shape 
of its main square today. 
4
© UNESCO/Prensa latina
Pilasters and wrought-iron balustrades are part  
of Camagüey’s charm.
legendary camagüey
The birthplace of Cuba’s national poet, Nicolás Guillén, has just been inscribed on the World 
Heritage List. With its red tiles, neoclassical façades with their louver-boards and pilasters, 
windows and carved screens, the city of Camagüey offers its visitors a haughty and legendary 
beauty
© Ele Willoughby
The old houses still bear the names of their owners in 
colonial times.

neoclassical houses, which still bear the names of 
their owners in olden times. 
These large palaces, built in the second half of 
the 19th century, conform to the fashion of the era 
that favoured neoclassical style and had as anteced-
ents the vast two-storey houses of the previous cen-
tury. We can therefore affirm that starting in 1850 
architecture took on a new esthetic. The most elo-
quent example is the Socarrás building, designed in 
1862 by the Spanish architect Dionisio de la Iglesia, 
whose influence is evident on all subsequent 
 buildings. Everywhere we find the rhetorical alterna-
tion of pilasters and bay windows as well as balco-
nies defined by wrought-iron balustrades. 
In 1841, Camagüey comprised 125 streets com-
posed of 1033 blocks of houses, and already standing 
since the 18th century were buildings like the con-
vent and hospital of San Juan de Dios, the churches 
of La Merced and La Soledad, the Jesuit college and 
the women’s hospital, all imposing constructions 
typical of the century’s architecture. 
But if there is one thing that gives personality to 
this city the Cubans call “Legendary”, it is the enor-
mous earthenware jars, like those in Andalusia, 
placed on the patios of houses and in gardens and 
parks which fill with rainwater and are intended to 
keep epidemics from spreading. They started making 
them in 1620, at the same time as the bricks and 
tiles used in the construction of all the city’s 
buildings. 
Camagüey is also scattered with an impressive 
number of churches, which earned it the nickname 
“city of temples”. All of them share the same feature, 
a single tower. The architectonic complex that 
includes the Iglesia de Nuestra Señora del Carmen, 
the Ursuline convent and the women’s hospital is the 
most typical example.
If the cart had not got stuck  
in the mud…
But the church that goes farthest back in time is the 
old Ermita de Nuestra Señora de la Soledad, haunted 
by a legend. The story goes that at the beginning of 
the 17th century, a cart drawn by oxen came to a 
halt at the future site of the church, stuck in the 
mud. The load was removed to lighten the cart and a 
mysterious bundle fell to the ground, containing the 
image of Our Lady of La Soledad. Brother José de la 
Cruz Espí, known as Father Valencia, recognized this 
as a sign and had the church built, along with a 
number of other Christian houses of worship. 
It was in Camagüey, furthermore, that what is 
considered Cuba’s first literary work, El Espejo de 
Paciencia, the Mirror of Patience, materialized, writ-
ten by the public writer from the Canary Islands 
Nicolás Guillén, the island’s national poet. 
In the general cemetery is preserved the epitaph 
that poet and barber Agustín de Moya is believed to 
have written in memory of his beloved and inacces-
sible Dolores Rondón. According to Méndez, Dolores, 
the illegitimate daughter of a Catalan merchant, 
chose out of self-interest to accept the advances of a 
Spanish officer instead of the love-struck Moya’s. In 
1863, the barber found her in the women’s hospital, 
disfigured and dying of the pox. Above the common 
grave where she was buried, an epitaph appeared on 
a piece of wood. Anonymous hands renewed the 
inscription as the years passed, until finally in the 
19th century the mayor, Pedro García Argenot, 
decided to build a tomb in the central part of the 
cemetery. 
The epitaph on it reads: 
4
© Ahron de Leeuw
Daily life in Camagüey.
4

Here Dolores Rondón came to the end of her path. 
Come, mortal, and consider, 
How great are pride and self-importance 
Opulence and power 
Everything withers in the end 
Because nothing is immortal 
Except the harm we keep ourselves from doing 
And the good we are able to do. 
Marilyn Bobes, Cuban poet. 
4
