  
{ THR COURIER; 
1999 \ 
WANGARI MUTA MAATHAL: 
KENYA'S GREEN MILITANT 
INTERVIEW BY ETHIRAJAN ANBARASAN, UNESCO COURIER JOURNALIST. 
A noted environmental and pro-democracy 
activist hopes the next millennium will see 
a new African leadership that puts people first. 
WANGARI MUTA MAATHAI 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
 
You once said that the quality of the environment cannot be 
improved unless and until the living conditions of ordinary 
people are improved. Could you enlarge on this? 
If you want to save the environment you should protect the people first, 
because human beings are part of biological diversity. And if we can't 
protect our own species, what's the point of protecting tree species? 
It sometimes looks as if poor people are destroying the environment. 
But they are so preoccupied with their survival that they are not con- 
cerned about the long-term damage they are doing to the environment 
simply to meet their most basic needs. 
So it is ironic that the poor people who depend on the environment are 
also partly responsible for its destruction. That's why | insist that the 
living conditions of the poor must be improved if we really want to save 
our environment. 
For example, in certain regions of Kenya, women walk for miles to get 
firewood from the forests, as there are no trees left nearby. When fuel 
is in short supply, women have to walk further and further to find it. Hot 
meals are served less frequently, nutrition suffers, and hunger increas- 
es. If these women had enough resources they would not be depleting 
valuable forest. 
What is at stake in the forests of Kenya and East Africa today? 
Since the beginning of this century, there has been a clear tendency to 
cut down indigenous forests and to replace them with exotic species 
for commercial exploitation. We've now become more aware of what 
this involves and have realized that it was wrong to cut down indig- 
enous forests, thereby destroying our rich biological diversity. But much 
damage has already been done. 
 ad, JA | 
MEMBER OF KENYA’S GREEN BELT MOVEMENT. 
26

“The act of planting 
trees conveys 
a simple message. 
It suggests that 
at the very least you 
can plant a tree and 
improve your 
habitat. It increases 
people’s awareness 
that they can take 
control of their 
environment, 
which is the first 
step toward greater 
participation 
in society’ 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
When the Green Belt Movement (see box page 47) started its campaign in 
1977 to plant trees, Kenya had about 2.9 per cent of forest cover. Today the 
forested area has further dwindled to around two per cent. We are losing 
more trees than we are planting. 
The other important issue is that the East African environment is very vulner- 
able. We are very close to the Sahara desert, and experts have been warning 
that the desert could expand southwards like a flood if we keep on felling 
trees indiscriminately, since trees prevent soil erosion caused by rain and 
wind. By clearing remaining patches of forests we are in essence creating 
many micro-Sahara deserts. We can already see evidence of this phenom- 
enon. 
We hold civic education seminars for rural people, especially farmers, as part 
of campaigns to raise public awareness about environmental issues. If you 
were to ask a hundred farmers how many of them remember a spring or a 
stream that has dried up in their lifetime, almost 30 of them would raise their 
hands. 
What has your Green Belt Movement (GBM) achieved 
and in particular to what extent has it prevented 
environmental degradation in Kenya? 
The most notable achievement of the GBM in my view has been in raising 
environmental awareness among ordinary citizens, especially rural people. 
Different groups of people now realize that the environment is a concern for 
everybody and not simply a concern for the government. It is partly because 
of this awareness that we are now able to reach out to decision-makers in the 
government. Ordinary citizens are challenging them to protect the environ- 
ment. 
Secondly, the GBM introduced the idea of environmental conservation 
through trees because trees meet many basic needs of rural communities. 
We started out by planting seven trees in a small park in Nairobi in 1977. At 
that time we had no tree nursery, no staff and no funds, only a conviction that 
ordinary country people had a role to play in solving environmental problems. 
We went on from there and now we have planted over 20 million trees all over 
Kenya. 
The act of planting trees conveys a simple message. It suggests that at the 
very least you can plant a tree and improve your habitat. It increases people's 
awareness that they can take control of their environment, which is the first 
step toward greater participation in society. Since the trees we have planted 
are visible, they are the greatest ambassadors for our movement. 
Despite the Rio earth summit of 1992 and the Kyoto climate summit 
in 1997, there has been no significant progress in environmental 
protection programmes and campaigns at a global level. Why? 
Unfortunately, for many world leaders development still means extensive farm- 
ing of cash crops, expensive hydroelectric dams, hotels, supermarkets, and 
luxury items, which plunder human and natural resources. This is short-sighted 
and does not meet people's basic needs—for adequate food, clean water, 
shelter, local clinics, information and freedom. 
As a result of this craze for so-called development, environmental protection 
has taken a back seat. The problem is that the people who are responsible for 
much of the destruction of the environment are precisely those who should be 
providing leadership in environmental protection campaigns. But they are not 
doing so. 
Also, political power now is wielded by those who have business interests 
and close links with multinational corporations (MNCs). The only aim of these 
MNCs is to make profit at the expense of the environment and people. 
We also know that many world political leaders are persuaded by MNCs not 
to pay attention to declarations made in international environmental confer- 
ences. | strongly believe that as citizens we should refuse to be at the mercy 
of these corporations. Corporations can be extremely merciless, as they have 
no human face.. 
You started your career as an academic. Later you became an envi- 
ronmentalist, and now you are called a pro-democracy activist. How 
would you describe your evolution in the last 25 years? 
Few environmentalists today are worried about the welfare of bees, butterflies 
and trees alone. They know that it is not possible to keep the environment 
pure if you have a government that does not control polluting industries and 
deforestation. 
In Kenya, for example, real estate developers have been allowed to go into the 
27

A 20-million-tree 
green belt 
In a country where women play a mar- 
ginal role in political and social affairs, 
59-year-old Wangari Muta Maathai’s 
achievements stand out as an exception. 
A biologist, she was the first woman 
from East Africa to receive a doctor- 
ate, to become a professor and chair 
a department-all at the University of 
Nairobi. 
Maathai began to be active in the 
National Council of Women of Kenya 
in 1976 and it was through the Council 
that she launched a tree-planting project 
called “Save the Land Harambee” (a 
Swahili word meaning let’s all pull 
together). The project was renamed the 
Green Belt Movement (GBM) in 1977. 
The GBM initiated programmes to 
promote and protect biodiversity, to 
protect the soil, to create jobs especially 
in rural areas, to give women a positive 
image in the community and to assert 
their leadership qualities. 
The overall aim of the GBM has been 
to create public awareness of the need 
to protect the environment through 
tree planting and sustainable manage- 
ment. Nearly 80 per cent of the 20 
million trees planted by the GBM have 
survived. At present the GBM has over 
3,000 nurseries, giving job opportuni- 
ties to about 80,000 people, most of 
them rural women. 
In 1986 the GBM established a Pan- 
African Green Belt Network and has 
organized workshops and training 
programmes on environmental aware- 
ness for scores of individuals from 
other African countries. This has led to 
the adoption of Green Belt methods in 
Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi, Lesotho, 
Ethiopia, and Zimbabwe. 
Maathai, who is a member of the UN 
Secretary General's Advisory Board on 
Disarmament, has won 14 international 
awards, including the prestigious Right 
Livelihood Award. She won the award, 
presented by a Swedish foundation 
and often referred to as an Alterna- 
tive Nobel Prize, in recognition of her 
“contributions to the well-being of 
humankind”. 
In a country where single-party rule 
prevailed for decades, Maathai has 
been teargassed and severely beaten by 
police during demonstrations to protect 
Kenya's forests. 
“The government thinks that by threat- 
ening me and bashing me they can 
silence me,” says Maathai. “But I have 
an elephant’s skin. And somebody must 
raise their voice.” 
Maathai, a mother of three children, is 
currently involved in a struggle to save 
the 2,500-acre Karura forests, north- 
west of Nairobi, where the government 
wants to build housing complexes. 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
middle of indigenous forests and build expensive houses. As concerned 
individuals we should oppose that. When you start intervening at that 
level, you find yourself in direct confrontation with policy-makers and you 
start to be called an activist. 
| was teaching at the University of Nairobi in the 1970s, when | felt that 
the academic rights of women professors were not being respected 
because they were women. | became an activist at the university, insisting 
that | wanted my rights as an academic. 
Meanwhile, | found myself confronted by other issues that were directly 
related to my work but were not clear to me at the outset, like human 
rights. This directly led me to another area, governance. As a result | was 
drafted into the pro-democracy campaign. 
| realized in the 1970s that in a young democracy like ours it was very 
easy for leaders to become dictators. As this happened they started using 
national resources as though they were their personal property. | realized 
that the constitution had given them powers to misuse official machinery. 
So | became involved in the pro-democracy movement and pressed for 
constitutional reforms and political space to ensure freedom of thought 
and expression. We cannot live with a political system that kills creativity 
and produces cowardly people. 
With your academic qualifications you could have lived a com- 
fortable life in the U.S. or elsewhere in the West. But you decided 
to come back and settle down in Kenya. In the last 25 years, you 
have been verbally abused, threatened, beaten, put behind bars 
and on many occasions forbidden to leave the country. Have you 
ever regretted returning to Kenya and becoming an activist? 
| did not deliberately decide to become an activist, but | have never regret- 
ted the fact that | decided to stay here and to contribute to the develop- 
ment of this country and my region. | know that | have made a little differ- 
ence. 
Many people come up to me and tell me that my work has inspired them. 
This gives me great satisfaction because in the earlier days, especially 
during the dictatorship, it was difficult to speak. 
Until a few years ago, people used to come up to me in the street and 
whisper “| am with you and | am praying for you.’ They were so scared of 
being identified with me that they did not want to be heard. | know a lot of 
people were afraid of talking to me and being seen with me because they 
might be punished. 
| have been a greater positive force by staying here and going through 
trials and tribulations than if | had gone to other countries. It would have 
been very different to live in the West and say my country should do this 
and that. By being here | encourage many more people. 
Do you think you were subjected to virulent attacks and abuses 
because you questioned men’s decisions? 
Our men think African women should be dependent and submissive, defi- 
nitely not better than their husbands. There is no doubt that at first many 
people opposed me because | am a woman and resented the idea that | 
had strong opinions. 
| know that at times men in positions of influence, including President 
Daniel Arap Moi, ridiculed me. At one time Members of Parliament ac- 
cused me and ridiculed me for being a divorced woman. | have felt that 
deep inside they were hoping that by calling into question my woman- 
hood | would be subdued. Later they realized they were wrong. 
In 1989, for example, we had a big confrontation with the authorities 
when we were fighting to save Uhuru Park in Nairobi. | argued that it 
would be ridiculous to destroy this beautiful park in the centre of the city 
and replace it with a multi-storeyed complex. 
Uhuru Park was the only place in Nairobi where people could spend time 
with their families outdoors. The park was a wonderful place for people to 
go because it was a place where no one bothered them. 
When | launched the campaign opposing the construction of the “Park- 
monster”, as the project later came to be known, | was ridiculed and ac- 
cused of not understanding development. | didn’t study development but | 
do know that you need space in a city. Fortunately other non-governmen- 
tal organizations and thousands of ordinary people joined our protests 
and finally the park was saved. 
The government, which wanted to destroy that park, has since declared it 
a national heritage. That's wonderful. They could have done that without 
fighting and without ridiculing me. 
28

    i : vi \ i NER RN 
IN MADAGASCAR, A WOMAN PLANTS RICE IN THE ASHES OF A FELLED AREA OF FOREST, 
HOME TO THE LAST SURVIVORS OF A LEMUR SPECIES. 
What made you stand in the presidential elections in 19977? Despite your popularity, why didn’t you win a sizeable 
number of votes? 
| decided to stand for election for several reasons. In 1992, when a multi-party system was legalized in Kenya for 
the first time, | tried very hard with other political groups to unite the opposition, but in vain. When there were many 
opposition candidates running for the presidency, | withdrew from the campaign. 
As expected, the opposition lost those elections and everybody now accepts that the campaign we launched for 
them to unite was right. We wanted to form a government of national unity within the opposition in 1992. This is 
exactly what they are now clamouring for. 
In the 1997 general elections, my idea was to persuade the opposition to unite and field a strong candidate from 
one ethnic community against the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU).1 But | was called a tribalist by 
some opposition groups for proposing that idea. When all my efforts to unite the opposition failed, | decided to run 
for president. 
But during the campaign | also came to realize that in this country it is very difficult to get elected without money. | 
didn’t have money. | realized that it doesn’t matter how good you are, how honest you are and how pro-democratic 
you are, if you don’t have money to give to the voter you won't get elected. So | lost. 
All this gave me a new experience. Now | can speak as an insider. | also realized that people here are not yet ready 
for democracy and we need a lot of civic education and political consciousness. People here are still controlled by 
ethnicity and vote along ethnic lines. The ethnic question became a very important issue during the last elections. 
Despite having enormous natural resources Africa still lags behind other continents in terms 
of development and growth. Why is this? 
Poor leadership, without any doubt. This generation of African leaders will go down in history as a very irrespon- 
sible one that has brought Africa to its knees. During the past three decades, Africa has suffered from a lack of 
visionary and altruistic leaders committed to the welfare of their people. 
There are historical reasons for this. Just before independence was granted to many African countries, young Afri- 
cans were promoted by colonial rulers to positions until then unoccupied by the local people and were trained to 
take over power from the colonial administration. 
The new black administrators and burgeoning elites enjoyed the same economic and social life-styles and privileg- 
es that the imperial administrators enjoyed. The only difference between the two in terms of the objectives for the 
country was the colour of their skin. 
In the process, the African leaders abandoned their people, and in order to maintain their hold on power they did 
exactly what the colonial system was doing, namely to pit one community against another. This internal conflict 
continued for decades in many African countries, draining their scarce resources. 
So what we need is to improve our leadership. If we don't there is no hope, because history teaches us that if you 
cannot protect what is your own somebody will come and take it. If our people cannot protect themselves they will 
continue to be exploited. Their resources will continue to be exploited. 
It is also true that Western powers, especially the former colonial masters of this region, have continued to exploit 
Africa and have continued to work very closely with these dictators and irresponsible leaders. That is why we are 
now deep in debt, which we cannot repay. 
Africa also needs assistance from international governments to improve its economic standing. For example, most 
foreign aid to Africa comes in the form of curative social welfare programmes such as famine relief, food aid, popu- 
lation control programmes, refugee camps, peace-keeping forces and humanitarian missions. 
At the same time, hardly any resources are available for sustainable human development programmes such as 
functional education and training, development of infrastructure, food production and promotion of entrepreneur- 
ship. There are no funds for the development of cultural and social programmes which would empower people and 
release their creative energy. 
| am hoping that in the new millennium a new leadership will emerge in Africa, and | hope this new leadership will 
show more concern for the people and utilize the continent's resources to help Africans get out of poverty 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 29
