turn off the lights please!
Each one of us can show more respect towards Mother Nature, by changing his or her 
lifestyle, believes the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize Rajendra Pachauri. A follower of the 
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam philosophy, who considers the universe like a family, he chairs 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
At the end of last year, the Nobel Peace Prize was 
attributed to IPCC which you chair and to America’s 
former vice-president Al Gore. Could this be seen as 
a sign of change in the world’s attitude towards 
global warming? 
Indeed the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the IPCC 
and Mr. Al Gore is an important statement on what 
the Norwegian Nobel Committee sees as a danger to 
peace arising out of unmitigated climate change. 
Since the Nobel Peace Prize and the significance 
attached to it get a great deal of attention and cover-
age worldwide, hopefully people’s attitude towards 
this issue will be affected as a result. 
What are the impacts of climate change on peace? 
The impacts of climate change on peace can be numer-
ous. First, the availability of water is decreasing, 
water resources are under high stress in several parts 
of the world. Second, extreme events such as heat 
waves, floods, droughts and extreme  precipitation, 
© J. Lingaraj
Rajendra Pachauri.
coastal flooding as a result of sea level rise, can lead 
to population movements on a sizeable scale. The 
migration of large numbers of people can have an 
impact on peace, since the locations where such 
people move to may find this to be an unacceptable 
imposition. Finally, the impacts of climate change on 
agriculture could also lead to large scale malnutri-
tion, hunger and deprivation, which could end in con-
flict within communities and further movement of 
large numbers away from areas where food is scarce.
In your Nobel lecture, you highlight that scholars 
do not pay enough attention to the inequities aris-
ing from these changes, although they are part of 
the most significant aspects of the impacts of cli-
mate change. Could you develop this idea? 
Scholars have not paid adequate attention to the 
equity implications of climate change because thus 
far research has largely focused on the physical 4
© Thamirez Nogueira Magalhães (Brazil)
Drawing by Thamirez Nogueira Magalhães (Brazil), one of the 
laureates of the contest organized by the International Year  
of Planet Earth.

 science aspects of climate change, the vulnerability 
aspects as well as on the options for mitigation. 
Now, however, there is growing awareness about 
equity as an ethical issue related to climate change. 
You head The Energy and Resource Institute which 
developed a germ that breaks down petrol. Can you 
explain how it works and what the results are? 
We have a major biotechnology programme in The 
Energy and Resources Institute, and some of our work 
has resulted in the development of microbes that 
consume petroleum products. This technology is 
being used now quite extensively for cleaning up oil 
spills and oil sludge deposits. Once the oil has been 
completely eaten up, the microbes perish without 
any environmental effects. 
You subscribe to the philosophy of Vasudhaiva 
Kutumbakam, which means the whole universe is 
one family. What is the role of Indian traditional 
culture in your work? 
It is difficult for me to identify what role Indian tra-
dition and culture play in my work, but having been 
brought up in this country and holding Indian tradi-
tion in great respect, I suppose everything I do is 
influenced by my upbringing and beliefs.
You believe that each one of us can do something 
for a better and safer world. What advice would you 
give our readers?
Each one of us can do a great deal to make this world 
better and safer. First, we must develop a belief in 
the need for protecting the environment. We must 
also realize the danger of treating Mother Nature 
with disrespect and of damaging the earth’s ecosys-
tems and natural resources. We could then find ways 
to minimize our footprint on the earth’s natural 
resources and ecosystems. This would involve simple 
things like switching off lights when we leave the 
room, using efficient energy consuming devices, 
using energy efficient transport such as public trans-
port, promoting the use of renewable forms of 
energy… We can bring about a lifestyle change in 
which we reduce reusing and recycling products that 
we have become accustomed to. Technology will also 
bring about change towards lowering the intensity of 
natural resource use, which in turn should be sup-
ported by policies. But lifestyle changes are impor-
tant too. 
4
© UNESCO/Fiona Ryan
Sign to raise environmental awareness, Island of Gorée, 
Senegal.
