A true linguistic enigma, Ainu (Ainu Itak) can’t be 
linked with certainty to any family of languages. Yet, 
as numerous specialists agree that the Ainu people 
are descendants of populations from the Jômon era 
(11,000 to 6,000 B.C.) that inhabited the Japanese 
archipelago, it is very probable their language finds 
its origins in Neolithic languages. 
According to historical sources, the Ainu people 
first settled the northern part of the Japanese archi-
pelago. The inhabitants of the Tohoku region (in the 
north of Honshu, the largest Japanese island) gradu-
ally had to abandon their language and culture start-
ing in the 14th century, due to pressure from the 
central government. But further north, in Hokkaido, 
as well as in the southern part of Sakhalin Island 
(the north belonging to Russia) and in the more iso-
lated Kuril Islands, they were able to preserve them 
until the islands were annexed by the new Meiji gov-
ernment in 1869. 
Not long after, following the signing of the 1875 
“Treaty for the Exchange of Sakhalin for the Kuril 
Islands” between Japan and Russia, most of the Ainu 
from southern Sakhalin were displaced to Hokkaido. 
Epidemics decimated the population. The same fate 
befell the Kuril Islands Ainu, who died out entirely 
after being forcibly regrouped, for national security 
reasons, on an island off the coast of Hokkaido. Jap-
anese authorities feared that these Ainu, some of 
them converts to Orthodox Christianity, would serve 
as spies for the Russians established in the Kurils. 
At the end of the Russian-Japanese war, as of 
1906, a good number of the Ainu from Sakhalin 
returned, because Japan controlled the south of the 
island. But on Stalin’s orders all were expelled in 
1945 and they settled in Hokkaido. Sakhalin’s tradi-
tion and dialect disappeared as the expatriates died 
– generally, they hadn’t transmitted their knowledge 
to the next generation. 
Beginning in 1868, the Japanese government 
imposed a new way of life on the Hokkaido Ainu. A 
series of prohibitions concerning hunting and fish-
ing, for instance, traditional Ainu resources, pro-
foundly undermined their culture. The community 
was stigmatized, considered savage and inferior. 
the saga of the ainu language
Several thousand years old, the Ainu language spoken in northern Japan was dying out 
due to political pressure from the central government. At the end of the 20th century, 
this trend was reversed. While Ainu’s future is still not guaranteed because it isn’t 
taught in schools, the resurgence of interest is undeniable.
© DR
In the past, the Ainu occupied the northen part of 
the Japanese archipelago.

Officially, the new Hokkaido authorities never 
intended to eradicate the Ainu language. But they 
did everything to that end, notably by building 
schools specifically for the “natives” in which they 
were taught Japanese. In order to survive in this new 
Hokkaido society, irrigated by continual waves of 
Japanese immigrants, the Ainu gradually gave up 
their customs and their language. Today, for new 
generations, Ainu is a second language, if they even 
speak it.
The last Ainu is not dead
The exact number of Ainu speakers is unknown. Only 
surveys conducted every seven years since 1972 by 
the Hokkaido government, concerning living condi-
tions among uteri (compatriot, in Ainu) people, allow 
an approximate assessment of the Ainu language sit-
uation. The 2006 poll shows that out of 23,782 Ainu, 
304 know the language, and among these 4.6% feel 
they master it to the point of being able to teach it. 
But we mustn’t forget these answers are subjective 
and don’t necessarily correspond to reality. Further-
more, much of the population doesn’t participate in 
polls and hides its identity. 
This said, assertions that the Ainu language is 
becoming extinct must be understood in relative 
terms. Since the 1990s, whenever an Ainu dies, the 
media announce the death of the last Ainu speaker, 
forgetting that more and more Ainu are starting to 
relearn their language, inspired by elders or 
linguists. 
To replace the 1899 law supporting assimilation 
policies, the Ainu demanded the promulgation of a 
new law in the 1980s. The law for the protection and 
promotion of Ainu culture was finally promulgated in 
1997, facilitating, for instance, language 
instruction.
A law can change everything
Founded in 1946, Hokkaido’s Ainu association, the 
largest in Japan, gives free language courses in 14 
regions in Hokkaido, to both Ainu and Japanese stu-
dents. No statistics on attendance are available, 
however. The foundation for research and promotion 
of Ainu culture, created by the 1997 law, has a sec-
tion for training Ainu language teachers; it accepts 
seven students a year. 
The publication of dictionaries, textbooks and 
bilingual Ainu-Japanese collections of Ainu oral liter-
ature is increasing year by year. A private radio sta-
tion in Sapporo has been broadcasting a weekly Ainu 
language class program over Hokkaido territory since 
the 1980s. In April 2001, Shigeru Kayano, activist for 
Ainu identity and first Japanese parliament member 
from this community (1926-2006), financed the crea-
tion of a radio station, FM Pipaushi that airs a show 
in Ainu locally in central Hokkaido two Sundays a 
month. 
It must be recognized, however, that for now the 
Ainu interested in their language are from relatively 
affluent backgrounds. The Ainu are for the most part 
marginalized and have little time to devote to learn-
ing their language. Despite the upsurge of interest, 
as long as Ainu is not part of the curriculum in 
Hokkaido schools, its future is uncertain. This 
© Flickr/Mistah Sinclair
The exact number of Ainu speakers is unknown.

 language is part of Japanese intangible heritage and 
is entitled to government protection, notably through 
its official recognition as a second national 
language.
By Kaori TAHARA, historian of Ainu origin, graduate of 
the École des hautes études en sciences sociales, Paris.
© Flickr/Jens Mattow
Post card representing a group of Ainus, around 1990.
