4
Focus
koyo, a place for dialogue between  
two cultures
On a piece of cloth spread out on the floor, a poet is painting the letters of his poem in French. 
He translates it orally into Toro Tegu for the six Dogon villagers of Koyo, in northern Mali, who 
work with him. Immediately they trace their graphic characters on the same cloth. The poet and 
the painters are responding each in his own way to the spirit of the place. The work produced 
here belongs neither to the French nor the Dogon culture – it opens a new space of dialogue and 
creation. 
It will soon be eight years since Yves Bergeret from France and Hamidou Guindo, Alguima 
Guindo, Belco Guindo, Yacouba Tamboura, Dembo Guindo and Hama Alabouri Guindo from Mali 
started working together every year. 
A unique experiment in dialogue between two cultures and two art forms is turning space into 
speech, a place into a poem. But it led to the creation of a school and a museum of a new and 
different kind. 4

In the summer of 2000, I 
arrived alone in the village of 
Koyo, on the top of a moun-
tain in northern Mali, 1000 
kilometres from Bamako. You 
can only get there on foot, 
and some climbing is required. 
About 500 inhabitants. Houses 
of earth and stone among 
orange rocks – materially, very 
poor. Yet here the mountain - 
simple, epic and so beautiful 
– speaks. As a poet, I read 
space, which is the Other’s 
speech, and I answer. I there-
fore wrote about this village, 
perceiving that one lives there 
only by listening to the spirit 
of this mineral environment 
set on the edge of the desert. 
I came back often. I 
learned the village was Dogon, 
without writing; it is the most 
active of the easternmost Dogon ethnic groups’ and 
the only one remaining on top of a mountain. In the 
plain, Peul and Tuareg nomads are dominant. Up 
above, in Koyo, I gradually got to know six farmers 
who painted, on the inner walls of their houses: 
Hamidou Guindo, Alguima Guindo, Belco Guindo, 
Yacouba Tamboura, 
Dembo Guindo and Hama 
Alabouri Guindo. 
When I met them, 
they had on their walls 
large checkerboards in 
ocre, black and white, 
adorned with a few 
graphic characters – 
strange, deep gestures 
expressing their mineral 
setting. They cultivate 
this environment almost 
bare-handed, in meticu-
lous fashion, in little 
terraces next to basins 
of water between the 
rocks on the summit’s 
plateau. 
Accepted by the vil-
lage, I suggested to 
these painters during 
my third stay that together we should create poem-
paintings about the place, on cloth at least the size 
of sheets or floor coverings; I had already practiced 
this approach of creation as dialogue in Haiti with 
carpenter-painters and in Senegal with painters of 
pirogues.
Creation as dialogue
We took one step at a time. Gradually I learned the 
village language, Toro Tegu. Little by little the tradi-
tional chief, the elders and the painters showed me 
around their mountain, even the remote and secret 
places. They taught me certain rites to approach 
these places. 
They imparted some myths and the powers of cer-
tain ancestors. Yes, after my 20th working visit, I 
can say the place where they live is the place of 
intelligence, of initiatory knowledge and of a vigi-
lant kind of ethics. The space is words in action. The 
place is a poem. Certain women elders in the village, 
during an occasional night ceremony, sing and dance 
the reminders and the reactivation of the founding 
words for the entire community. 
4
4
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
Creating a blue triptych in the Painters House, July 2007.
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
The painters and the poet are mounting an exhibit in the open 
air, Koyo.

We now proceed as follows. The painters are 30 to 
50 years old, I am somewhat their elder. As tradi-
tional chief, Alabouri Guindo, who is the same age as 
I am, always comes with us. First we walk on the 
mountain for a long time, to encounter the visible 
and the invisible. Then the painters derive the theme 
we will work on together from our day of walking. On 
the cloth spread on the ground outside, I paint the 
letters of the poem I compose. With the participa-
tion of the village chief, I translate the poem. Imme-
diately the painters paint their graphic figures on 
the same cloth. Then, as they put it, they “read me 
what they have written” and ask me to note it. 
This is our dialogue of creation: a poet who reads 
space and animistic farmers inventing graphic designs 
to express the same thing, in tandem. 
In the work, each one’s thought has its place. 
Each writes according to his graphic method. The 
work is a third entity, never exclusively in their world 
or mine. Powerfully modern. Together we pay intense 
attention to the human and sacred beauty of the 
place. And, what amounts almost to the same thing 
on this mountain, we also pay intense attention to 
the ethics of speaking and listening. We create a 
work that makes visible and transmits oral heritage, 
which is thereby strongly reactivated, and produces 
active poetic speech. 
In the same process we also create our poem-paint-
ings on stones that we raise and leave where they are, 
to guard the village, the ancestors and the spirits.
A welcoming village keeping  
its distance
Renting the works on cloth (and a few on paper) to 
galleries (like the Museo nazionale Pigorini in Rome, 
for one) funds their production and the development 
project defined by the village. In 2000 the village 
was struggling to survive on top of the mountain; 
desertification and poverty drove people to descend 
and no doubt adapt to the plain. But our dialogue of 
creation simultaneously reactivated heritage and 
made it possible to install water reservoirs, a health 
worker, a school for 50 children in a single class, etc. 
In 2006, we built a “Painters’ House” at a short 
distance from the village, because visitors and tour-
ists are starting to show up. The uninhabited house 
fruitfully and vigilantly channels curiosities. 
The pride of the whole village, the house’s inte-
rior walls bear the vast and complex designs of the 
painters, my companions in creation, and express in 
a very dynamic modern medium the deep thought 
and beauty of the place. These are enlivened by the 
encounter between oral heritage and the poet who 
writes; all of these paintings talk about the fecun-
dity and permanence of speech. 
In 2007, very actively involved in creation and 
transmission, the painters and I founded five more 
“Painters’ Houses” on the plain at the foot of the 
mountain. The village welcomes visitors, but keeps 
its distance. 
Yves Bergeret, French poet
With this article, the UNESCO Courier joins in the 
celebration of World Day for Cultural Diversity for 
Dialogue and Development (21 May) 
4
© UNESCO/Yves Bergeret
The poet and the painters responding their own way to the spirit 
of the place.
