The first time Sveinn Jakobsson set foot on Surtsey 
island, the western crater Surtungur was spitting 
lava into a big glowing red lake flowing to the sea. It 
was June 1964. The newborn island had been spew-
ing volcanic ashes, smoke and steam at the sky for 
the past seven months. The eastern crater Surtur had 
just fallen asleep when its twin Surtungur started 
erupting. “It was fantastic,” said Jakobsson, an Ice-
landic geologist who has been monitoring Surtsey 
for 40 years. “I was only a student. It was my first 
eruption… It was breathtaking.” 
Surtsey emerged from the ocean floor in Novem-
ber 1963. Within four years, the little drop of smoky 
land located 32 km south of Iceland reached the size 
of 2.65 km2, its peak culminating 175m above sea 
level. 
Surtsey is one of 18 islands and skerries of the 
Icelandic Vestmannaeyjar archipelago (the Westman 
Surtsey Island: a 
life-size laboratory
The island of Surtsey (Iceland), recently 
added to the World Heritage List, has 
been a unique opportunity for scientists 
to monitor evolution since the day it 
emerged from the sea in 1963. The once 
barren volcanic island preserved from 
human interference is now crowding with 
plants, insects and birds.
islands), a young volcanic system whose activity 
started about 100,000 years ago. It is the youngest 
and second largest island after Heimaey (13.6km2), 
the only one of the archipelago to be inhabited. 
Marine erosion has made Surtsey shrink to half its 
original size. But, contrary to its two tiny neighbours 
Syrtlingur and Jolnir that survived only six months, 
the 45-year-old island won’t be washed away before 
long. 
The key to Surtsey’s longer life expectancy is its 
hydrothermal anomaly: when the ocean, heated up 
by lava extrusions, penetrates the porous tephra 
made of volcanic ashes and rock fragments, the 
steam makes the loose tephra consolidate into pal-
agonite tuff. Palagonite tuff, which consists mainly 
of basaltic glass, is much more solid than tephra and 
does not erode easily, Jakobsson said. That’s why the 
© UNESCO/Torgny Nordin
This little patch of land emerged from the ocean in 1963.

palagonite tuff core of Surtsey of approximately 
400 m2, about the size of a basketball court, will 
probably remain intact for a few thousand years.
A paradise for scientists
A Nature Reserve since 1965, Surtsey is well pre-
served because human presence and activities have 
been minimal. Nobody is allowed to set foot on Surt-
sey except six to ten scientists who monitor the 
island for one or two weeks every year. Human facili-
ties are limited to a field hut, a helicopter pad and a 
lighthouse. The scientists must be careful not to 
bring soil, organisms and pollutants to the island or 
leave any waste. Besides, there is no heavy industry 
or environmentally hazardous activity within a 50-km 
radius of the island. 
Surtsey is the only volcanic island in the world 
that has been so carefully studied since the first day 
of its emergence. “It is still the best described erup-
tion of this kind,” Jakobsson said. The fast coloniza-
tion of species, which has been carefully monitored, 
shows the island is becoming similar to the rest of 
the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago. “In the old days 
there was a handful of species, we could mark them 
and see how the seeds would spread,” said the Ice-
landic plant ecologist Borgthór Magnússon. But they 
have spread so fast that Magnússon now keeps track 
of them on permanent study plots on the island. 
Shortly after Surtsey emerged from the sea, algae 
and organic material drifted ashore feeding microor-
ganisms like bacteria and fungi. Meanwhile, the wind 
and the ocean carried the first seeds onto the shore. 
Shore plants like sea sandwort, lyme grass and oyster 
plants progressively spread on the sand and tephra 
substrate. In 1970 the first sea birds, the Northern 
fulmar and black guillemot, started breeding on the 
cliffs of Surtsey. 
Four years later, the first sea gulls nested on the 
island. “The gulls had a very strong effect on the 
development of the island,” Magnússon said. They 
started pulling out native plants to build their nests 
in the developing dunes, which enhanced plant devel-
opment. Then, they were the first birds to breed upon 
the sands and ashes of Surtsey. They also carried 
seeds of new plant species to the island and  fertilized 
the soil with their excrements. The first land bird, a 
snow bunting that feeds on insects, was seen in 
1996. “We are always excited to see if we have a new 
species. It’s like we’ve found a treasure,” Magnússon 
said. 
Surtsey is a migrating crossroads between Europe, 
Iceland, and the Canadian Arctic. That’s why two 
migratory bird species, the meadow pipit and white 
wagtail, often stop by, while two rare species, the 
European Squacco heron and the North American 
northern oriole, have been sighted a few times. On 
the whole, 12 species and more than 1,200 birds 
breed on Surtsey.
A puffin island
Besides its vibrant bird life, 335 invertebrate species 
including flies, butterflies, spiders and molluscs have 
been found on Surtsey. Seals come breed and pup on 
the shore, while Minke whales, killer whales, harbour 
porpoise and dolphins have been seen along the 
coast. On the other hand, four plant species out of 
69 haven’t survived. 
A new, white mineral found in 1991 may be named 
“Surtseyite,” Jakobsson said. In the craters scattered 
by colourful encrustations, and the lava caves that 
show impressive stalactites, 18 mineral species have 
been identified. 
Despite the proliferation of species in just half a 
century, Magnússon predicts Surtsey will be a puffin 4
© UNESCO/Sigurður H. Magnússon
Barren in 1963, the island is now rich in plants.
4

island 200 years from now. The grassland is becom-
ing similar to what is found on the other Westman 
islands where the puffin, a white and black-headed 
© Ómar Runólfsson

In 200 years, Surtsey will be inhabited by sea parrots,  
like this handsome specimen.
4
bird with a bright orange beak and a black frock coat, 
likes to breed and nest. “It is likely to become the 
biggest bird population of Surtsey and breed there in 
far greater numbers as time passes,” Magnússon 
said. 
Now Surtsey is a World Heritage site, the Surtsey 
Research Society hopes to “create interest in pro-
tecting Surtsey and do more research,” said its chair-
man Steingrímur Hermannsson. The gatekeeper of the 
island may also hope to bring back the international 
scientists and funds that were involved in the early 
days of Surtsey. 
Surtsey, whose name come from Surtur, the god of 
fire in the Icelandic mythology, has just started to 
fire our interest. 
Laurène Mainguy, intern at the UNESCO Courrier. 
The UNESCO Courier published in February 1974 an issue 
 dedicated to Iceland: “The Iceland saga”.
 