With its umbrella-shaped dome, it stands like an 
elegant and solitary princess in the semi-desert land-
scape. This picturesque cupola remains a key element 
of Armenian architecture from the 10th century until 
now. Set on a drum, which allows the inside of the 
church to be lit almost entirely from above, it sur-
mounts the vaulted ceiling, symbol of the heavens 
and the aspiration for salvation. Placed in the centre 
of the church, the cupola crowns the juncture of the 
four arms of the cross, representing the assembly of 
believers, the church of humanity on earth. 
Patrick Donabedian, researcher at the Laboratoire 
d’archéologie médiévale méditerranéenne (CNRS, 
France) et Jasmina Šopova, UNESCO Courier.
4
4

In Papua New Guinea, the Kuk Swamp agricultural 
community is well-organized, and despite what 
people think, that’s not new! The traditional land-
owners of the area, the Kawelka, have been cultivat-
ing sweet potatoes, bananas and coffee across the 
area most recently since the 1990s, but they inhab-
ited the area during various periods of the twentieth 
century and before. 
The Kawelka say they told stories to anthropolo-
gists who took them away, whereas archaeologists 
told them stories that they didn’t know. Among these 
stories is the fact that 7,000 to 10,000 years ago, 
Kuk was a centre of early independent agricultural 
development. It was a place where people undertook 
a transition from pre-existing foraging practices to 
agriculture.
A world cradle of agriculture
Against all odds, Kuk Swamp proves 
that agriculture started in Papua New 
Guinea 10,000 years ago. Kuk Swamp, a 
new World Heritage site, holds treasured 
remains of early agriculture and drainage. 
By cultivating the land, the Kawelka 
people preserve their heritage.
© Eric Lafforgue
In Papua New Guinea, humans began mastering agriculture 
10,000 years ago.
The taming of the banana
For many people including archaeologists, the moun-
tains of Papua New Guinea seem an unlikely place to 
find evidence of early independent agricultural devel-
opment. But archaeological excavations in the 1960s 
and investigations carried out by Jack Golson [a now 
retired Australian archaeologist who passed on the 
torch to Tim Denham,] have proven otherwise. 
Archaeological remains such as cultivated sur-
faces, raised beds and ditches of ancient cultivation 
have been found buried in Kuk Swamp, located 1,550 
metres above sea level in the Upper Wahgi Valley, 
which is one of the largest valleys in the mountain-
ous spine that runs east-west across the centre of 
the island of New Guinea. Such archaeological 

 findings are exceptional because the transition from 
foraging practices to early independent agriculture 
occurred in very few places in the world. Thus, each 
of them including Kuk is of global significance for 
understanding one of the greatest technological 
developments of modern humans. 
Different types of agriculture based on certain 
crops and cultivation methods emerged independ-
ently in Southwest Asia, Southeast China, the Ameri-
cas, potentially Africa, and New Guinea. In Southwest 
Asia and Southeast China, early agriculture was seed-
based on cereals, legumes and other plants. 
By contrast, early New Guinean agriculture, as it 
is still practiced on the island today, was based 
exclusively on the propagation of a range of food 
and economic plants including fruit and nut-bearing 
trees, root crops like yams and taro, sugarcane, herbs, 
leafy vegetables and bananas. Recent studies sug-
gest most of these plants, especially the banana, 
were first domesticated in the New Guinea region. 
Some seed-based planting also occurred, but cultiva-
tion consisted mainly of vegetative reproduction uti-
lizing tubers, corms, suckers, stems and cuttings.
Cultivating the soil  
to protect the site
Ten thousand years ago, people were clearing patches 
within the rainforest and modifying the wetland 
environment at Kuk, whose landscape probably looked 
like a mosaic of forest, grassland patches and  habitats 
disturbed by human activities. A few pits dug into 
the wetland edge and stone tools embedded with 
microscopic residues of tubers of taro and yam sug-
gest the population had already started to focus on 
starch-rich plants. 
Three thousand years later, the inhabitants really 
started developing the area. They grew plants on 
mounds, a type of raised bed, along the wetland 
margin: the underground bases of these preserved 
beds are still discernible in the mud. They cultivated 
water-tolerant plants like taro at the base of the 
mounds, and water-intolerant plants such as bananas 
and yams on the top. It also seems that these starch-
rich staples were inter-cropped with leafy 
vegetables. 
Similar forms of multi-cropped cultivation have 
occurred on adjacent slopes of the Kuk Swamp area. 
The rainforest of the Upper Wahgi valley was com-
pletely cleared because of horticulture activities and 
burning. Most of the valley has remained a grassland 
since then. 
A drainage system of articulated ditch networks 
was implemented 4,000 years ago to enable cultiva-
tion. The Swamp contains the oldest, best-preserved 
and most extensive cultivation remains in New 
Guinea, which consist of traces in different types of 
mud made of old soils and former drainage feature 
fillings. The extent and patterns of ditch networks 
have varied through time. Although the reasons for 
4
© Taro Taylor
Fruit and nut trees were among the first to be cultivated  
in New Guinea.
4
© Eric Lafforgue
Hand of a « mud man » (Papua New Guinea)  
with sharpened bamboo.

periodic drainage and abandonment of the wetland 
are unknown, it could be related to climatic, hydro-
logical or social factors. 
Today, several hundred Kawelka live on and culti-
vate Kuk Swamp and its surroundings. Despite oral 
traditions that intimately relate the community to 
the land, the Kawelka are not sure whether their con-
nection to Kuk extends back over millennia. But it 
doesn’t matter. 
They have voluntarily committed themselves to 
protect the buried archaeological remains, which 
includes leaving certain areas free of cultivation and 
regulating development in other areas. To the 
Kawelka, heritage is something they are directly con-
nected to through their land and history. Thus, the 
protection of Kuk is achieved by allowing the Kawelka 
to continue to occupy and cultivate the site. 
Tim Denham, Monash University, Australia.
4
4
