to endorse recent political 
ideology af fect human 
rights? 
Let me clarify here that my 
fight was against the BJP­ 
led government and the Hin­
dutva view of Indian history, 
and not against other govern­
ments in India. The Hindutva 
lobby that insisted on the 
changes in Indian textbooks 
endorses a Hindu right­wing 
ultra­nationalism – of ten 
described as Hindu funda­
mentalism – and is trying to propa­
gate a rev is ionist histor y in 
classrooms and political discourse. 
The parent organization in India, 
known as the Rashtriya Swayamse­
vak Sangh (RSS), has a distinctly 
religious fundamentalist political 
agenda. The RSS and its political 
arm, the Bharatiya Janata Party 
(BJP), gained power defeating mode­
rate secular Indians by exploiting 
Hindu nationalist sentiments. The 
RSS has been involved in several 
high­profile incidents of religiously 
motivated violence over the last 
twenty years. 
The controversy on my work involved 
some textbooks I had written for 
middle schools, where I had talked 
about the lives of Aryans as we knew 
it from the Vedic texts. I had men­
tioned, for instance, that the early 
Indians ate beef – the references in 
the Vedas are clear, and there is 
archaeological evidence for this. The 
Hindu right wing extolled the Aryans 
as the great model society for ancient 
India, and were opposed to any criti­
cism of them. When they objected to 
this and other statements of mine, I 
provided evidence   
You have strongly opposed the 
attempt to use history in support 
of an ideology of religious nation-
alism by the right-wing Hindu 
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), 
which was in power from 1998 to 
2004. There was an attempt at the 
time to rewrite Indian textbooks. 
How does the rewriting of history 
ideology ClasHing witH History
Early in the decade, a woman raised her voice against 
Hindu fundamentalism asserting Aryan superiority. 
And she was heard. Her name: Romila Thapar. The 
famous Indian historian explains here how spurious 
identities founded on pseudo-historical arguments 
affect human rights.
Romila Thapar is professor emeritus of History at 
Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, and one of the 
world’s foremost experts of ancient Indian history. Her 
seminal work, “History of India, Vol. 1” has been in print 
ever since it was first published in 1966. Dr. Thapar, who 
believes in interpreting ancient Indian texts in the light 
of new insights, has taught at top institutions including 
Oxford University, Cornell, the College de France in Paris, 
and the University of London. She has been involved in her 
country’s debates about historical truth, political identity and social reform. 
Interview by Shiraz Sidhva, Indian journalist.  
Vedic.com. © Vedic texts.
Romila Thapar is the first Holder of the Kluge 
Chair in Countries and Cultures of the South at 
Library of Congress (in 2004).  © John Harrington

one hand, which involves question­
ing existing knowledge about the 
past where necessary, and faith on 
the other hand, where even myths 
are acceptable. The two have to be 
kept separate. The first is the domain 
of the historian and the second that 
of the priest.
On a wider international level, 
many human rights atrocities in 
recent years have sought to draw 
legitimacy from history, using the 
pretext of setting right the wrongs 
of the past. How can this be 
avoided?
Political parties today draw heavily 
on ideology and also on history, 
because a lot of the current politics 
is determined by imagined identities 
– either imagined racial identities, 
or imagined religious identities, or 
whatever the identities may be, 
there is a construction of identities. 
They are projected back into the 
past, but in effect really arise out of 
concerns of the present. And these 
imagined identities that go into the 
making of political ideologies are 
very likely to grapple with history. 
The grappling also takes the form of 
creating the notion  
  continued on page 12
  from the texts as proof. But 
they insisted that children should 
not be told that beef was eaten in 
early times. My reaction was that it 
was historically more correct to 
explain to school children why in 
early times beef was eaten, and why 
later a prohibition was introduced. 
Though the attack on me was vicious, 
I was not the only historian attacked. 
There were about six of us, who had 
authored the earlier textbooks, and 
others who spoke up against the 
changes in school curriculum and 
textbooks by the (then) government, 
made without consulting educational 
bodies that would normally have 
been consulted. The government 
then described us as being anti­
Hindu, and therefore anti­Indian, 
and therefore anti­patriotic, and 
therefore, traitors. 
The deletion of passages from our 
books and the ban on any discussion 
of the deleted passages raised a 
number of issues of various kinds 
pertaining to the rights of individu­
als and the ethics of government 
institutions.
There was also a virulent protest 
by some Indians living in the 
United States when the US Library 
of Congress appointed you as the 
first Kluge Chair in Countries and 
Cultures of the South in 2004. 
What became of these protests and 
were textbooks revised when the 
Congress government replaced the 
Bharatiya Janata Party in New 
Delhi?
The Library of Congress rejected 
without any hesitation the demand 
from the Hindutva lobby, particu­
larly Indians living in the United 
States, to reverse my appointment, 
therefore the demand was slowly 
silenced. The abuse online and 
t h r ough  e ­ma i l s  con t inued 
unabated. 
When the Congress reclaimed power 
in 2004, it decided to do away with 
all the previous textbooks, written 
by us as far back as the 1960s and 
70s, as well as those produced by the 
BJP government just prior to its fall. 
A new set of books was commis­
sioned, which are now in use. They 
are different from the ones we wrote 
and reflect some of the new interests 
in history as a discipline, and do not 
push a Hindutva hard line. 
The worrying thing is, what will 
happen if the Bharatiya Janata Party 
returns to power in the next elec­
tion, which will be held within 12 
months? Will they change the text­
books again? I worry for the school 
children who have to be examined in 
the subjec t  and depend on 
textbooks. 
Once we accept one religious group’s 
agenda and beliefs to be taught in 
the public schools, it opens the door 
for every other group to do the same 
thing. As educators, we have to make 
a distinction between history on the 
The restored Hindu temple of Somnath. © Flickr
Madrid, April 1939: demonstration at the end of the first civil war. 
© All rights reserved

  of what is believed to be a 
nat ional culture, THE nat ional 
culture. This is never questioned, 
because if you question it, you 
become a traitor to the nation. And 
it is usually a single, carefully selec­
ted strand from the broader culture 
which is drawn out and exaggerated, 
and this facilitates the potential 
exclusion of some citizens on the 
basis of either religion or race or 
language or whatever identity is 
conveniently within reach. This is 
very harmful to issues of human 
rights, because it gives priority to 
certain groups and their cultures 
over others. 
But isn’t it a dangerous notion, for 
those in power to believe they can 
set right the wrongs of the past? 
This is a commonly made claim. We 
have an example, in the Indian case, 
where a Hindu political faction led 
by BJP leaders destroyed the (16th 
century) Babri Masjid at Ayodhya (in 
Northern India) in 1992, and claimed 
that they were avenging Mahmud of 
Ghazni’s attack on Somnath (a Hindu 
temple) and thereby setting right 
this wrong of the past. 
First of all, did it have to take a 
thousand years before this act (of 
Ghazni) was avenged if indeed the 
idea was to avenge it? More impor­
tant, how did it set right the wrongs 
of the past? What was the result of 
the destruction of the Babri Masjid? 
It made not the slightest difference 
to our reading of the past. What it 
did was that it resulted in a massacre 
of Muslims in (the Western Indian 
state of) Gujarat, and since then, a 
continued series of bomb explosions 
in the major cities of the country. So 
what is argued as setting right the 
wrongs of the past cannot be set 
right in this fashion. And in any case, 
it’s a rather silly argument, because 
the past is that which has happened. 
It cannot be changed, and therefore, 
it’s much more important to set right 
the wrongs of the present, rather 
than harping on what might have 
been the wrongs of the past.  
