Doris Lessing: Is it so impossible to 
imagine such bare poverty?
Doris Lessing, Nobel Prize in Literature 2007, grew up in today’s Zimbabwe, before 
moving to London in 1949. Greatly attached to the country of her youth, which rejected 
her as undesirable for her anti-apartheid stand, the British novelist devoted a large part 
of her Nobel lecture, “On not winning the Nobel Prize”, to it. Excerpts.
I am standing in a doorway looking through clouds 
of blowing dust to where I am told there is still uncut 
forest. Yesterday I drove through miles of stumps, 
and charred remains of fires where, in ‘56, there was 
the most wonderful forest I have ever seen, all now 
destroyed. People have to eat. They have to get fuel 
for fires. 
This is north-west Zimbabwe in the early eighties, 
and I am visiting a friend who was a teacher in a 
school in London. He is here “to help Africa,” as we 
put it. He is a gently idealistic soul and what he 
found in this school shocked him into a depression, 
from which it was hard to recover. This school is like 
every other built after Independence. It consists of 
four large brick rooms side by side, put straight into 
the dust, one two three four, with a half room at one 
© Chris Saunders
Doris Lessing: « The storyteller is deep inside every one of us».
end, which is the library. In these classrooms are 
blackboards, but my friend keeps the chalks in his 
pocket, as otherwise they would be stolen. There is 
no atlas or globe in the school, no textbooks, no 
exercise books, or biros. In the library there are no 
books of the kind the pupils would like to read, but 
only tomes from American universities, hard even to 
lift, rejects from white libraries, or novels with titles 
like Weekend in Paris and Felicity Finds Love. […] 
As I sit with my friend in his room, people drop in 
shyly, and everyone begs for books. “Please send us 
books when you get back to London,” one man says. 
“They taught us to read but we have no books.” Eve-
rybody I met, everyone, begged for books.
I do not think many of the pupils 
of this school will get prizes
I was there some days. The dust blew. The pumps had 
broken and the women were having to fetch water 
from the river. Another idealistic teacher from Eng-
land was rather ill after seeing what this “school” 
was like. 
On the last day they slaughtered the goat. They 
cut it into bits and cooked it in a great tin. This was 
the much anticipated end-of-term feast: boiled goat 
and porridge. I drove away while it was still going 
on, back through the charred remains and stumps of 
the forest. 
I do not think many of the pupils of this school 
will get prizes. 
The next day I am to give a talk at a school in 
North London, a very good school, whose name we 
all know. It is a school for boys, with beautiful build-
ings and gardens. 4

These children here have a visit from some well 
known person every week, and it is in the nature of 
things that these may be fathers, relatives, even 
mothers of the pupils. A visit from a celebrity is not 
unusual for them. 
As I talk to them, the school in the blowing dust 
of north-west Zimbabwe is in my mind, and I look at 
the mildly expectant English faces in front of me and 
try to tell them about what I have seen in the last 
week. […] I am sure that anyone who has ever given 
a speech will know that moment when the faces you 
are looking at are blank. Your listeners cannot hear 
what you are saying, there are no images in their 
minds to match what you are telling them – in this 
case the story of a school standing in dust clouds, 
where water is short, and where the end of term treat 
is a just-killed goat cooked in a great pot. 
Is it really so impossible for these privileged stu-
dents to imagine such bare poverty? 
I do my best. They are polite. 
I’m sure that some of them will one day win 
prizes. 
Then, the talk is over. Afterwards I ask the teach-
ers how the library is, and if the pupils read. In this 
privileged school, I hear what I always hear when I 
go to such schools and even universities. 
“You know how it is,” one of the teacher’s says. “A 
lot of the boys have never read at all, and the library 
is only half used.” 
Yes, indeed we do know how it is. All of us. 
We are in a fragmenting culture, where our cer-
tainties of even a few decades ago are questioned 
and where it is common for young men and women, 
who have had years of education, to know nothing of 
the world, to have read nothing, knowing only some 
speciality or other, for instance, computers. […]
We are good for irony and cynicism
We are a jaded lot, we in our threatened world. We 
are good for irony and even cynicism. Some words 
and ideas we hardly use, so worn out have they 
become. But we may want to restore some words that 
have lost their potency. 
We have a treasure-house of literature, going back 
to the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans. It is all 
there, this wealth of literature, to be discovered 
again and again by whoever is lucky enough to come 
upon it. A treasure. Suppose it did not exist. How 
impoverished, how empty we would be. 
We own a legacy of languages, poems, histories, 
and it is not one that will ever be exhausted. It is 
there, always. 
We have a bequest of stories, tales from the old 
storytellers, some of whose names we know, but some 
not. The storytellers go back and back, to a clearing 
in the forest where a great fire burns, and the old 
shamans dance and sing, for our heritage of stories 
began in fire, magic, the spirit world. And that is 
where it is held, today. 
Ask any modern storyteller and they will say there 
is always a moment when they are touched with fire, 
with what we like to call inspiration, and this goes 
back and back to the beginning of our race, to the 
great winds that shaped us and our world. 
© Mark Taber
Child holding a school book in shona, language spoken 
by 80% of Zimbabwe’s population.

they had not eaten for three days, that may yet 
define us. 
Doris Lessing, Nobel Prize in Literature 2007
The storyteller is deep inside every one of us. The 
story-maker is always with us. Let us suppose our 
world is ravaged by war, by the horrors that we all of 
us easily imagine. Let us suppose floods wash through 
our cities, the seas rise. But the storyteller will be 
there, for it is our imaginations which shape us, keep 
us, create us -for good and for ill. It is our stories 
that will recreate us, when we are torn, hurt, even 
destroyed. It is the storyteller, the dream-maker, the 
myth-maker, that is our phoenix, that represents us 
at our best, and at our most creative. 
That poor girl trudging through the dust, dream-
ing of an education for her children, do we think that 
we are better than she is - we, stuffed full of food, 
our cupboards full of clothes, stifling in our 
superfluities? 
I think it is that girl, and the women who 
were talking about books and an education when 
© Emma Kinsella
We are a jaded lot? Not all of us!

