The Indian tower of Babel takes the shape of a pyra-
mid, with Hindu and English at the top, both of which 
remain foreign languages for two-thirds of the popu-
lation. Then come the official languages of the States 
and Territories (regional languages), followed by 
minority languages, spoken by more than a million 
people, but with no administrative function. Hun-
dreds of others are located at the foot of this impos-
ing linguistic edifice, under the aegis of a linguistic 
minority commissioner whose mandate is advisory 
and not legally binding. 
In all: 1,650 languages, with 400 used as lan-
guages of communication. Among the latter, 22 are 
spoken by 75% of Indians and are listed in the Indian 
constitution. It guarantees the protection of lan-
guages that are not listed, but only 60 of those are 
taught in schools, 11 of them registered as minority 
or tribal. 
An odd fact: Hindi, the official Indian union lan-
guage along with English, is spoken by only 40% of 
the Indian population and is therefore a minority 
language. The issue of minorities is extremely com-
plex, insofar as language is an element closely related 
to ethnic and religious identity. Muslims, for instance, 
speak Urdu, Sikhs Panjabi, and Anglo-Indians English. 
While their languages are recognized by the constitu-
tion, more than 600 tribal minorities from the moun-
tains speak languages that are not taught in 
schools.
The trilingual formula
The sub-continent counts more than one billion 
inhabitants, 35% of them under 15 years of age. The 
Indian government has the onerous task of managing 
an education system that dates back about 150 years 
and today comprises 664,041 primary schools, 
219,626 upper primary schools, 133,492 secondary 
schools, 297 universities, 8,737 university-level gen-
eral education colleges and 2,409 professional 
institutes. 
Since its independence in 1947, the country has 
been putting into effect educational policies aimed 
at mass literacy and economic development – key 
factors to unite a people split into a multitude of 
religions, languages, castes and cultures. 
Beginning in 1952, the Indian government’s sec-
ondary education commission put forward the outline 
of a multilingual educational policy including the 
mother language, the regional (or State) language, 
Hindi as the language of general communication and 
one of the classical languages (Sanskrit, Pali, Arabic 
or Persian). 
the Indian dilemma
With some 1,650 languages and more than a million schools including all levels, 
India faces a serious challenge: to ensure national cohesion without compromising the 
interests of regional languages. It has invented the “three language formula”, difficult 
to implement.
© Flickr/Orso FIlippi
All languages are good enough for advertising!

Revised in 1961, the proposal was named “three 
language formula” (TLF) including the regional lan-
guage, Hindi in non-Hindi-speaking areas or another 
Indian language in Hindi-speaking areas, plus English 
or another European language. 
Finally, between 1964 and 1966, the Education 
Commission proposed a modified version of TLF: the 
mother language or regional language; an official 
language, Hindi or English; and another modern lan-
guage, Indian or foreign. 
Over the 12 years of primary and secondary school, 
instruction is given in the mother or regional lan-
guage from the first to the fifth year, and TLF is 
introduced in the sixth year.
No magic formula
Recognized as the national norm, TLF is nonetheless 
not applied to the letter in all states. It is more 
hypothetical project than social reality. Although 
priority is given to the mother language at least at 
the start of formal education, if not throughout 
schooling, it is not obligatory. Certain states, such 
as Tamil Nadu, have opted for two instead of three 
languages; in others, instead of learning a modern 
language, a classic language is substituted, like San-
skrit or Arabic. In some schools French or German is 
taught instead of Hindi. 
Failure of state policy? Or instead, as we would 
say, a dynamic and flexible linguistic policy in edu-
cation, which seeks to reconcile tradition and moder-
nity on one hand and institutional and civic 
responsibilities on the other. 
Because it must be understood that although 
tribal/minority languages are closely linked to cul-
tural, religious and ethnic identity, at the same time 
they are “useless” in contemporary life. Minority 
communities are torn between two trends: some 
demand their rights and struggle to obtain an offi-
cial status for their language, while others choose 
assimilation with the majority instead. 
In order to protect minority languages and safe-
guard the thousand-year-old heritage they contain, 
there is talk of turning the three language formula 
into a four language one. Nothing is yet certain. 
The state may well guarantee schooling in a 
minority language whenever a class contains 10 
pupils who speak it as their mother language, but 
the fact is most parents would prefer their children 
to learn English or be educated in English. The 
“unconstitutional” languages have no “market value” 
and social upward mobility often comes before socio-
cultural identity.
Appasamy Murugaiyan, Indian linguist, 
teaches at the École pratique des Hautes Études, Paris
© UNESCO/Mani Ngonekeo
The Venerable Chandaratana, in Sankassa, India.
© Flickr/Uba Devesh
Primary school in 
western Rajasthan.
