There are a number of hypotheses on the origins of 
theatre but the one I find the most thought-provok-
ing takes the form of a fable: 
One night, at the dawn of time, a group of men 
were gathered together in a quarry to warm them-
selves around a fire and tell stories. All of a sudden, 
one of them had the idea to stand up and use his 
shadow to illustrate his tale. Using the light from the 
flames, he made characters appear, larger than life, 
on the walls of the quarry. Amazed, the others recog-
nized in turn the strong and the weak, the oppressor 
and the oppressed, the god and the mortal. 
Nowadays, the light of projectors has replaced the 
original bonfire, and stage machinery, the walls of 
the quarry. And with all due deference to certain 
purists, this fable reminds us that technology is at 
the very beginnings of theatre and that it should not 
be perceived as a threat but as a uniting element. 
The survival of the art of theatre depends on its 
capacity to reinvent itself by embracing new tools 
and new languages. For how could the theatre con-
tinue to bear witness to the great issues of its epoch 
and promote understanding between peoples without 
having, itself, a spirit of openness? How could it 
pride itself on offering solutions to the problems of 
intolerance, exclusion and racism if, in its own prac-
tice, it resisted any fusion and integration? 
In order to represent the world in all its complex-
ity, the artist must bring forth new forms and ideas, 
and trust in the intelligence of the spectator, who is 
capable of distinguishing the silhouette of humanity 
within this perpetual play of light and shadow. 
It is true that by playing too much with fire, we 
take a risk, but we also take a chance: we might get 
burned, but we might also amaze and enlighten. 
Robert Lepage 
Quebec, 17th February 2008
Focus
theatre has to reinvent itself 
World Theatre Day, established in 1961, 
in Vienna by the International Theatre 
Institute, is celebrated each year on 
27 March, all over the world. The ITI is one 
of the most important non governmental 
organizations in the field of stage arts. 
Currently, there are ITI National Centres in 
a hundred countries. 
Traditionally, every year, the International 
Theatre Institute invites a world renowned 
personality to write an international 
message. 
This year, the famous Canadian Theatre 
Director Robert Lepage (Quebec) tells us the 
fable of the birth of theatre to reassure those 
who fear resorting to technologies on stage.
© Sophie Grenier
Robert Lepage: by playing too much with fire, we take the 
chance to amaze.
