A social gathering under a tree – 
an image easily dismissed as a 
relic of old-time African societies. 
Yet this traditional model, far from 
being outmoded, is proving effective 
to improve the lives of thousands of 
villagers in three of Zambia’s nine 
provinces, thanks to the work of the 
Peoples’ Action Forum (PAF), a non-
reADing The worlD
The UNESCO King Sejong Literacy 
Prize was awarded this year to the 
People’s Action Forum in Zambia for 
its programme “Reflect and HIV/AIDS” 
that empowers communities through 
literacy education to tackle issues 
linked to the pandemic. The programme 
uses local languages and cultural 
activities in its innovative strategy. 
Andrew Mulenga, 
The Post (Lusaka, Zambia)  
and Cathy Nolan 
(UNESCO Courier)  
The REFLECT method operates in groups that form circles.  
© UNESCO/People’s Action Forum
Education increases people’s self-
confidence. © UNESCO/People’s Action Forum
governmental organisation providing 
non formal adult literacy education 
in rural areas. Undeterred by lack of 
conventional infrastructure, throngs 
of people are getting together in the 
shade of trees, with makeshif t 
 blackboards, to receive instruction 
and discuss issues of importance to 
the community, including HIV and 
AIDS. 
For the past eight years, PAF has 
preached literacy as reading not 
merely the word, but the world. 
Working with whole communities, 
especially with women and children, 
PAF’s approach is to help local groups 
realise that their development is not 
some abstract body’s responsibility, 
but their own. 
To this end, PAF applies an educa-
tional approach known as REFLECT, 
based on a method developed by 
Brazilian education expert Paulo 
Freire. It stresses dialogue and 
action, awareness-raising, coopera-
tion and empowerment. Adult learn-
ers explore development challenges 
and find ways to overcome them. The 
approach not only upholds the old 
African adage that two heads are 
better than one, but also borrows 
methods typical of an African vil-
lage. REFLECT takes place in “Circle” 
groups whose philosophy is that no 
one comes to the learning process 
empty handed. Facilitators are mem-
bers of the community who have 
received training. 
“It is one of the most effective par-
ticipatory approaches to adult learn-
ing for soc ial change and 
transformation,” explains PAF’s ener-
getic executive director Jennipher 
Chiwela. Prior to founding PAF, she 
spent over 20 years in the civil 
 service, rising to the position of 
Zambia Teaching Service Commission 
chairperson before retiring in 2003.
Theatre for raising 
awareness
Early on, PAF decided to pay particu-
lar attention to the crucial issue of 
HIV and AIDS, a major obstacle to 
any progress a community can make. 
“We provide education to communi-
ties in rural areas  … continued on page 16 

continued from page 9  … where HIV and AIDS is rife. 
In the course of counseling and test-
ing people, we realized that the 
major gap was ignorance, so we 
moved in with literacy programmes,” 
explains Chiwela. “Non-formal educa-
tion opens up the minds of communi-
ties to be more assertive.” 
PAF’s work to raise HIV and AIDS 
awareness, in cooperation with other 
organizations, includes not only train-
ing people to be community facilita-
tors but also teaching drama and 
performance skills to members of Anti-
AIDS Clubs, who then put on shows. 
Theatre is a way to get the locals, par-
ticularly young people, involved in 
spreading the message. While perform-
ances are going on, HIV and AIDS 
counseling, testing and information 
distribution also take place. 
“This approach has broken silence 
around sexuality and HIV and AIDS, 
dispelling myths and making way for 
communities to seek solutions to 
the numerous related problems,” 
says Chiwela. “And through learning 
basic and essential literacy skills, 
people come to understand the 
nature of this pandemic and share 
the messages of prevention, care 
and mitigation.”  
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard © UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
