To celebrate the anniversary of his 
birth, the UNESCO Courier pays 
tribute to this writer, who belongs 
to the “Saturnian tribe”, those great 
melancholic artists, victims of incu-
rable wounds, making their way on 
the edge of madness and death. 
Born 9 September 1908 in Santo 
Stefano Belbo, in the Piedmont 
region, the poet committed suicide 
on 26 August 1950 in Turin. A short 
and mournful life, under the sign of 
Saturn. His deeply-rooted pessimism 
is easier to understand when we 
know he lost his father at the age of 
six and was brought up by a very 
strict mother. A colourless childhood 
between the authoritarian mother 
and an older sister he would never 
leave. Ancient pain: “There is on your 
face a silence that oppresses / the 
heart, dully, and distils an ancient 
pain / like the nectar of fruits fallen 
in those days.” (“Morning”) 
Cesare Pavese attended a Jesuit 
school in Turin. At university, he 
developed a passion for English lan-
guage literature, particularly poetry. 
In 1930, he undertook a thesis on 
the works of Walt Whitman. Bridging 
wide cultural gaps, he translated into 
his mother tongue the most demand-
ing Anglo-American authors, the 
likes of Herman Melville, John Dos 
Passos, Daniel Defoe, James Joyce or 
Landmarks
CesAre pAvese: unDer The sign of sATurn 
A man’s existence does not follow a straight line; it is accelerator and brake, suspense 
and motion. It is as fragile and shifting as mirages in the desert. The life of novelist, 
translator and poet Cesare Pavese, entirely devoted to literature, is no exception.
Abdourahman A. Waberi, 
Djiboutian author 
Charles Dickens. In 1930 he became 
very naturally an English teacher.
His era’s bad 
conscience
Italy at the time was in the throes of 
reactionary ecstasy. Members of his 
family pushed him into the clutches 
of the National Fascist Party, of 
which he was a member between 
1932 and 1935. Yet the poet’s little 
clay lamp did not go out in the tur-
moil. On the contrary. Not content to 
be merely his era’s bad conscience, 
as another poet of high lineage, the 
Frenchman Saint-John Perse, had 
predicted, he turned to concrete 
action. He was arrested in 1935 for 
anti-Fascist activities linked to the 
political movement Giustizia e Libertà 
founded in Paris in 1929 by a mili-
tant anti-Fascist group. Expelled 
from the party, Pavese was exiled in 
Calabria for eight months. His first 
collection of poems (“Work’s Tiring”) 
dates from this period: a sort of 
subtle autobiography where silence 
is rich with various echoes. Obscure 
and ancestral earthly passions sur-
face here and there: “The silence for-
ever / is quiet, calm and hoarse in 
past memory.” (“The Voice”) 
The spirit of the past is never far 
away. “A day will come when the 
young god will be a man / Without 
suffering, with the dead smile / of 
the man who has understood. The 
sun too glides in the distance / red-
dening the beaches. A day will come 
when the god will no longer know 
where were yesterday’s beaches…” 
(“Myth”)  …
Turin, where Cesare Pavese lived and suffered.  © All rights reserved

every trouble or pain. That’s what 
terrifies me: suicide is my principle, 
never consummated, that I will never 
consummate, but which soothes my 
sensibility.” 
The writer from Turin belongs, with 
Friedrich Nietzche, Walter Benjamin 
and a number of others, to the 
“Saturnian tribe”- those great melan-
cholic artists, exceptionally gifted, 
victims of incurable wounds from 
childhood, making their way on the 
edge of madness and death. 
Cesare Pavese was certainly one of 
the most influential and talked-about 
post-war authors. In turn poet, nov-
elist, critic, magazine editor, talent 
scout, cultural go-between and pub-
lisher, he spent his life in the service 
of literature. Real life and theoretical 
issues are never disassociated. The 
first task is living, of course. Sealed 
by failure, denied glory, it becomes 
all the more fascinating.  
Death  
will have  
your eyes
A moody, solitary and 
tormented soul, Pavese 
thought he had finally 
found the love of his life 
in Constance Dowling, 
American actress he met 
in Rome, only a few 
weeks before she aban-
doned him. The height 
of despair: the poet 
committed suicide in a 
Turin hotel room with an 
overdose of sleeping 
pills during the night of 
26-27 August 1950, 
when his fame had 
reached its peak. He left 
on his work table the 
poems that today constitute his last 
– and most acclaimed – collection of 
poems: “Death will come and it will 
have your eyes”. Suicide, for most a 
final act of desperation, had been for 
him an obsession, a magnet, almost 
a companion. In 1936, fourteen years 
before he killed himself, he confessed 
in his diary: “And I know I am 
doomed forever to think of suicide at 
… In 1939, he wrote his first 
prose text, “The Fine Summer”, pub-
lished only ten years later in a volume 
including two other novellas, “The 
Devil on the Hills” and “Women on 
Their Own”. They are, in the author’s 
own words, “Three urban stories, 
three stories about discovering the 
city and society, three stories of 
juvenile enthusiasm and disappointed 
passion.” The third novella was 
turned into a film in 1955 by 
Michelangelo Antonioni, entitled Le 
Amiche. 
Disappointment is a theme that runs 
throughout his work. The late 1930s, 
experienced as an artistic and psy-
chological crisis, also mark the start 
of his “new meditations on his work”, 
springing from the same soil as his 
personal diaries, “The business of 
living”, found and published after his 
death. 
Following World War II, Pavese joined 
the Italian Communist party. He 
worked for the Einaudi publishing 
house while continuing his writing 
career. In 1949 he published the 
novel “The Moon and the Bonfires”, 
which won him the prestigious Strega 
prize.
“The business of living”, detail of the book's cover 
illustration (in French). © All rights reserved
Since the Renaissance, the planet Saturn has been associated  
in the West with melancholy.  © HST/STSCI
