Twenty-seven new sites have been 
inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage 
List, in Quebec (Canada). While no 
changes were made to the List of Heritage 
in Danger, “reinforced monitoring” 
was requested for four sites: Bordeaux, 
(France),Timbuktu (Mali), Historic 
Sanctuary of Machu Picchu (Peru), 
Samarkand (Uzbekistan). 
Under the new mechanism, first 
introduced in 2007, the Committee 
will be kept informed of developments 
affecting the preservation of these sites 
on a regular basis with a view to deciding 
on their future status on the World 
Heritage List.   
A permAnent chAllenge
Over the past biennium, the World Heritage Com-
mittee examined almost 300 State of Conservation 
reports, the highest number ever examined by the 
Committee. Nine properties were removed from the 
List of World Heritage in Danger, in recognition of 
the improvement in their state of conservation, while 
5 additional sites were added. By flagging them on 
this special list, the Committee hopes to drawn par-
ticular attention to their plight.
Tip of the iceberg
But the In Danger List is only the tip of the iceberg. 
Most of the 878 World Heritage Sites face  conservation 
The 1972 Convention concerning the Protection of 
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage is perhaps 
the most widely recognized and effective conserva-
tion instrument in the world. One of its main pur-
poses is to ensure “the identification, protection, 
conservation, presentation and transmission to future 
generations of the cultural and natural heritage”. 
Inscription is thus not an end in itself but only the 
beginning. 
The World Heritage Committee provides leadership 
in promoting systems to support the sustainability of 
heritage sites. There are processes to identify threats 
to World Heritage properties, including periodic 
reporting, reactive monitoring and, in cases of severe 
threat, In Danger listing. 
© UNESCO /Véronique Dauge
Al-Hijr (Arabie Saoudite) est un des nouveaux sites inscrits  
du patrimoine mondial.

The first major case discussed by the Committee 
was the proposed Mitte Wein project in the Historic 
Centre of Vienna, which in 2003 sparked an ongoing 
debate. The most recent example is the proposed 
Gazprom Tower development in St. Petersburg, by the 
major Russian natural gas company. During its meet-
ing in Quebec, the Committee asked Russia to invite 
an expert mission from the World Heritage Centre 
and the International Council on Monuments and 
Sites (ICOMOS) to evaluate the tower’s impact, and 
to postpone action until results of the analysis are 
available. 
Infrastructure projects like dams, canals, roads 
and bridges are often highlighted in the state of 
conservation reports on specific World Heritage 
Sites. In the case of the Group of Monuments at 
Hampi, India, a proposed bridge that threatened the 
site’s values was re-routed away from the property, 
leading to the removal of the site from the In Danger 
List in 2006. Another situation yet to be resolved 
involves a proposed bridge at the Dresden Elbe Valley. 
In 2006, the Committee took the position that the 
bridge would “irreversibly damage the values and 
integrity of the property”. This year, it regretted the 
construction of the bridge underway and urged 
© UNESCO/José Gabriel M. Ruíz Lembo
A new world heritage site: 
the town of San Miguel de Allende in Mexico.

the authorities to opt for a tunnel. If the bridge con-
struction is not stopped and damage reversed, the 
Committee decided, the property will be deleted from 
the World Heritage List in 2009. 
The threat of uncontrolled tourism is one that 
occurs frequently at World Heritage Sites. There are 
travel companies that create tour packages around 
UNESCO sites, using the label ‘UNESCO World Herit-
age Site’ as a tourism marketing brand. At Angkor in 
Cambodia, there are reportedly 5000 visitors a day. 
In the Galapagos Islands, tourism has increased from 
40,000 visitors in 1991 to 120,000 in 2006. The prob-
lems related to tourism include threats to public 
security and the heritage resources as well as to the 
quality of the visitor experience. The World Heritage 
Committee works on developing principles for respon-
sible tourism that apply to the stewards and custodi-
ans, to tour companies, to the people who write 
guidebooks as well as to tourists. 
Over time, the Committee has dealt with cases of 
mining, logging, gas and oil extraction as well as the 
poaching of animals for commercial purposes. And 
the Committee can claim some spectacular successes, 
such as the re-routing of the mining road around 
Huascaran National Park (Peru) and the re-alignment 
of a proposed oil pipeline outside the watershed of 
Lake Baikal (Russia). A singular achievement for 
UNESCO is the 2003 undertaking by the International 
Council on Mining and Metals not to explore or mine 
in World Heritage Sites, recognizing them as “no-go” 
areas.
An important advance:  
reinforced monitoring mechanism
Among the less manageable threats are natural dis-
asters, including extreme weather events, fires and 
floods often related to the broader issue of climate 
change. In collaboration with international institu-
tions and committees, the World Heritage Committee 
has developed its own policy framework and opera-
tional plan for monitoring and addressing the impacts 
of climate change on World Heritage properties. (See 
“Case Studies on Climate Change and World  Heritage”, 
a 2007 UNESCO report) 
Another issue that is beyond the control of the 
Committee is the threat to sites from civil unrest and 
armed conflict. As an example, particular concern for 
the deteriorating condition of the properties in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) led the Commit-
tee last year to decide on a comprehensive approach 
for all five In Danger sites. 
The Committee has also recently adopted a “rein-
forced monitoring mechanism” for properties 
inscribed on the World Heritage List in Danger, apply-
ing it to the five sites in DRC, as well as Dresden and 
Jerusalem. This mechanism can be activated either 
by the World Heritage Committee or by the Director-
General of UNESCO in specific and exceptional cases. 
At its 32nd session in Quebec, decisions were taken 
to apply it to Timbuktu (Mali), Machu Picchu (Peru), 
Samarkand (Uzbekistan) and Bordeaux (France), 
4
© UNESCO/N.Burke
Hampi (India). General view.
© NESCO/I. Redmond
Skulls of plain gorillas, victims of war and  
the bush meat trade (DRC).
4

which are not on the In Danger list. The case of the 
five DRC sites was again closely examined. 
For the first time in the history of the Conven-
tion, the World Heritage Committee in 2007 decided, 
with deep regret, to remove a property, the Arabian 
Oryx Sanctuary in Oman, from the World Heritage 
List. The Committee judged that the property had 
deteriorated to the extent that it had lost its Out-
standing Universal Value. This dramatic moment of 
the Convention reminds us all that protection of 
World Heritage is a shared responsibility. It is the 
obligation of States Parties to protect the World cul-
tural and natural heritage situated on their territory; 
4
it is the duty of the international community as a 
whole to assist and to cooperate with States Parties 
in this endeavour. 
At the 32nd session in Quebec, Canada made a 
special effort to engage young people in the work of 
the World Heritage Committee. The long-term con-
servation of our World Heritage Sites depends on the 
will of future generations to take over stewardship 
responsibilities. Engaging today’s youth will shape 
the decision-makers of tomorrow. 
Christina Cameron, University of Montreal 
Chairperson of the 32nd World Heritage Committee  
