THE CHALLENGE 
OF PEACE 
Ev in June 1967, as 
participants in an international meeting 
of journalists held in Strasbourg, we 
tried to forget the outside world and 
spent an agreeable week discussing 
the recent progress of technology and 
its growing impact on the press. 
in our small way, we tried to make 
a contribution to that increasingly 
popular exercise which has been 
  
VADIM ARDATOVSKY, a Soviet journal- 
ist, is a well-known commentator on Inter- 
national relations in the U.S.8.R. He has 
taken part in several international confer- 
ences of journalists devoted to studies 
and discussions of world affairs and on 
world problems of mass communications. 
termed “Futurology” and which some- 
times skims fairly close to Science 
Fiction. We tried to visualize the 
world of tomorrow and more espe- 
cially what a “Golden Age” of journal- 
ism might be like tomorrow. We saw 
artificial satellites whirling through 
space, transmitting facsimile news- 
papers to every corner of the globe. 
Any family could select. any of the 
world’s newspapers at the touch of a 
button, and some of them were even 
“talking newspapers” which added a 
more personal touch. Stories by 
news reporters on the spot were sent 
directly to automatically operated 
composing machines, while front page 
dispatches were flashed instantan- 
eously via laser beams. 
by Vadim Ardafovsky 
Our tiny international group, made 
up of journalists from France, UK, 
U.S.S.R., US.A, the Arab countries, 
Japan, Yugoslavia, Ireland, Czecho- 
slovakia and other countries, even 
went so far as to work out how long 
it would take for such innovations to 
be introduced, whether in the next 
twenty, fifty or a hundred years. 
By tacit agreement we omitted any 
mention of politics despite the fact that 
a war had broken out in the Middle 
East that very week and no one could 
then predict whether it would be 
possible to circumscribe the conflict 
that had erupted or whether it would 
eventually spread to other countries. 
Our discussions on the future progress 
of the communications industry were 
  
Weapons of war (left). 
Tools for peace (right). 
But a tank costs far 
more than a tractor and 
natlons squander 
astronomical sums to 
maintain their arsenals 
of modern weapons. 
The cost of a new 
prototype bomber with 
full equipment, for 
example, equals the pric 
of 50,000 tractors, or 
75 fully equipped 100-be 
hospitals or 30 sclence 
faculties each with 
1,000 students (see 
“Unesco Courier”, 
November 1984). 
th
ot
o 
@
 
H
o
l
m
e
s
 
- 
Le
be
l   
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 4

  
  
based on what seemed a natural 
assumption that the world would 
develop peacefully in the foreseeable 
future. 
Clearly no one—except a compara- 
tively small group of professional 
military men—can think of drawing up 
vast plans for the future with the 
perspective of a world war in front of 
him. The architect breaking ground 
for a new skyscraper, the gardener 
landscaping a new park, the artist 
starting on a new painting, all think 
ahead to the future enjoyment and 
benefit of their work to society for 
years and even generations to come. 
To put it another way, the need for 
peace is as natural to man as his need 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
for oxygen, and the most important 
instinct of man—the instinct to stay 
alive. 
A Swiss scientist, lean-lacques 
Babel, has recently calculated that in 
the course of history man has waged 
14,500 major and minor wars, and the 
French sociologist, Gaston Bouthoul, 
is the author of a study entitled 8,000 
Traités de Paix (8,000 peace treaties). 
Someone has worked out that man's 
“Golden Age"—when peace has 
reigned throughout the world—has 
been of surprisingly short duration, 
hardly more than a total of 220 years! 
| wonder whether we shouldn't stop 
and reflect on this a moment, and ask 
ourselves how much those 14,500 wars 
5 
Photo 1 APN - 
have impeded the advance of civiliza- 
tion. 
People may differ widely in their 
opinions about Karl Marx's philosophy 
but no one, | believe, could argue with 
the following statement he made about 
war : “From a purely economic point 
of view, it is tantamount to a nation 
throwing a portion of its capital into 
the sea.” 
In the course of the Second World 
War, 60 per cent of the national rev- 
enue of the belligerent countries was 
drained away and lost forever. [n 
addition, this terrible holocaust claimed 
the lives of 50 million persons who 
died in a sea, not of water, but of 
blood. 
Ivanov 
  

4 
THE CHALLENGE OF PEACE (Continued) 
The rocky road 
to international agreements 
It would hardly seem necessary 
today to describe once again the 
horrible consequences of a new world 
war, a war fought with nuclear wea- 
pons. The destruction involved 
would go far beyond what any of us 
could possibly imagine. The world's 
press has on various occasions guoted 
a figure which is in no sense an 
exaggeration : the death of 700 to 800 
million people as a result of the first 
nuclear attack. 
0 eany therefore, neither 
common sense nor the spirit of huma- 
nity give mankind any other choice 
today than the establishment of a last- 
ing peace. Yet it is a secret to no one 
that we live in a world of unstable, 
uneasy peace. - Time and again we have 
seen the flames of war erupt in Korea, 
Algeria, Suez, Vietnam and the Middle 
East... As dangerous for peace today 
is the present tendency of the majority 
of nations to stockpile armaments. 
Professor George Schwartzenberger, 
of London University, was certainly 
right when he said that present-day 
relations between nations are permeat- 
ed with mutual distrust and constant 
fear of other nations’ intentions. 
It would therefore appear quite 
logical that nations seek to perfect the 
means for their own defence. But 
there does not seem to be any formula 
for doing away with the “world in arms” 
and the suspicions which derive from 
it, other than the elimination of the 
material basis of this fear and distrust, 
that is, the armaments themselves. 
It is only since the end of the 18th 
Century and in the brief interludes 
between wars in our own time that 
world political thought has been led to 
consider seriously the theory of gene- 
ral disarmament. in the past, disar- 
mament was applied to a country after 
it met defeat; it had to surrender its 
arms, its fortifications were destroyed 
and other measures of a similar nature 
were taken. Bitter experience kas 
taught us that far from preventing new 
wars and conquests this increased the 
danger of war. 
That is why, during the Second 
World War with its untold destruction 
and millions of victims, people every- 
where were made acutely aware of the 
urgency of establishing a tasting peace 
based on the one means of definitely 
guaranteeing it, namely, disarmament. 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
ended, Moscow, London, Washington 
and Paris were already seeking ways 
to build the peace of the future. 
In October 1943 a meeting of the 
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 
Four Allied Powers was held in 
Moscow. In the declaration they 
jointly signed it was emphasized that 
the problem of disarmament should be 
resolved in the same spirit of unity 
which had been displayed by the 
Great Powers of the Anti-Nazi coali- 
tion. 
The approach to the problem of 
disarmament at that time was perhaps 
somewhat naive : the soldiers would 
return home after victory and would 
abandon their rifles and uniforms 
forever; at the same time production 
of guns, tanks and bombers would be 
stopped. 
The appearance of a new type of 
weapon and its production by one of 
the Powers changed the situation. 
Disarmament became even more vital 
than before, but the solution to the 
problem became even more difficult. 
At the first session of the United 
Nations General Assembly in 1948, 
the U.S.S.R. proposed a “draft inter- 
national convention to prohibit the 
production and employment of wea- 
pons based on the use of atomic 
energy for the purpose of mass 
destruction.” This plan called for the 
destruction within three months of all 
atomic weapons and, what is often 
forgotten nowadays, the setting up of 
an international control body with very 
wide powers. This body would have 
had access to atomic installations in 
all countries and made sure that no 
state infringed the convention. 
H.. this project been 
adopted, the atomic bombs in the pos- 
session of the United States would 
have been destroyed, and neither the 
U.S.S.R. nor Great Britain, nor France 
nor any other nation would have been 
able to produce their own Atomic and 
Hydrogen weapons. The problem of 
disarmament would have resumed its 
“pre-nuclear” aspect and might have 
been easier to resolve. 
At the time, however, it was argued 
that the Soviet Union was seeking to 
destroy weapons it did not possess 
and thus obtain a military and strategic 
advantage. In view of the ideas 
6 
could well be justified. But had it 
been possible in 1946 to foresee the 
situation twenty years later, this 
argument might well have lost its full 
force and appeared politically short- 
sighted. 
Scientific and technical progress is 
governed by its own laws which are 
often independent of politics. Even 
in the days when Leonardo da Vinci 
was designing his flying machines, 
men vaguely foresaw the possibility of 
rockets and supersonic planes. Had 
the great atomic physicists and mathe- 
maticians whose names are now fami- . 
liar to everyone (with a timelag of 10 to 
20 years) never been born, there can 
be no doubt that other scientists would 
soon have discovered atomic energy 
along with its immense potentialities 
for destruction as well as for peace. 
The spread of nuclear energy and 
weapons to other countries was thus, 
obviously, only a question of time. 
Tw question of the control 
of nuclear weapons has certainly been 
the big stumbling block of ali discus- 
sions on disarmament. There was 
once a time when heated debates 
occurred over the question “which 
came first the chicken or the egg?” 
In our present age we have seen 
endless discussions on whether con- 
trol should precede disarmament or 
disarmament precede control. It must 
be obvious, however, that the only 
rational formula must be : “No disar- 
mament without control, and no control 
without disarmament.” In theory every- 
one is in agreement on this, both in 
the United States and the Soviet 
Union ; but in practice..... 
[In practice the means of war and 
destruction continue to be stockpiled 
and perfected. For this reason it is 
more important than ever to do 
everything possible to facilitate a 
detente in international relations, and 
to prepare the ground for eventual 
total disarmament by an effort to limit 
the present arms race. 
The first successful attempts in this 
direction was made in 1963 when the 
Powers signatory to the Moscow 
Treaty agreed to ban nuclear weapon 
tests in the atmosphere, in outer space 
and under water. Agreement came 
following a whole series of discus- 
sions, all of which centered on the 
major issue of control.

w 
atl. | 
Ns a 
ia al D, 2 
     
Photo © “Soviet Union” 
The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963 prohibited 
nuclear weapon 1lests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. 
France and Mainland China, who were not signatories, have since carried out 
nuclear tests in the atmosphere.” Top, scientist examines a radiogram which 
reveals extent of radioactive pollution in the atmosphere. Tests have shown 
that contamination by fall-out particies decreased considerably after the signing 
of the Moscow Treaty. Above left, dots and spots on a radiogram made 
in the autumn of 1962 indicate density of radioactive particles in the air. 
Above right, a 1985 radiogram hag only four spots (circled). 
the agreement was concluded, the 
sceptics and Doubting Thomases have 
been proved wrong. National detec- 
tion devices have shown their complete 
effectiveness in assuring reciprocal 
control. 
On December 19, 1966 the General 
Assembly of the United Nations 
unanimously adopted a historic treaty 
on principles governing the activities 
of States in the exploration and use of 
outer space including the Moon and 
other celestial bodies. The treaty 
specifically bans the orbiting in space 
of “any objects carrying nuclear 
weapons or any other kinds of wea- 
pons of mass destruction.” This 
“demilitarization of outer space” treaty 
was simultaneously signed in London, 
Moscow and Washington on January 
27, 1967. | was privileged to be 
present at the signing of this impor- 
tant document in Moscow which took 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
place in the same building where the 
Moscow Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was 
signed in 1963. 
We should not forget however that 
as early as 1958 the Antarctic Treaty 
(signed by 12 countries operating in 
the southern continent) guaranteed 
that Antarctica “shall continue forever 
to be used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes and shall not become the 
scene or object of international 
discord.” The treaty prohibits the 
establishment of military bases, military 
manceuvres and the testing of any type 
of weapons, and bans nuclear explo- 
slons or the disposal of atomic waste 
in the Antarctic. The demilitarization 
of Antarctica has assured the constant 
friendly co-operation of scientific bases 
and expeditions at work there, 
| feel that these steps, limited 
though they may appear to some, give 
us cause for optimism and are an 
incentive for further steps in the same 
direction. Thus, the time may well 
be ripe now to convene a world confer- 
ence in which every nation possessing 
nuclear weapons would pledge itself 
not to be the first to make use of such 
weapons. Then too, apart from 
Antarctica there are many parts of the 
world where denuclearized zones 
could be established. Plans have 
already been put forward for the 
denuclearization of Scandinavia, the 
Balkans, Africa, Central Europe as 
well as other areas. 
There are also various proposals 
(including one from the U.S.S.R.) for 
the reduction of all military budgets by 
10 to 15 per cent, or by any other 
agreed amount, although events in 
South-East Asia and the Middle East 
have made it extremely difficult to 
carry such projects out. 
The prohibition of underground 
nuclear explosions, however, now 
appears closer to a solution. Two 
years ago, at the 18-nation Geneva 
disarmament talks, several non-com- 
mitted countries put forward a compro- 
mise plan calling for a ban on high- 
powered underground explosions and 
a moratorium on all other underground 
explosions, pending the conclusion of 
a general agreement on the question. 
This proposal does not correspond 
fully to the Soviet position but it has 
been accepted by the U.S.S.R. as a 
palliative to give the discussion a new 
start. 
|. was with great interest 
that | read an article by Walter Lipp- 
mann published in the “Unesco Cour- 
rier” of October 1965 on the search 
for ways to establish peace on a 
lasting basis. While | admire the logic 
and the approach taken by Mr. Lipp- 
mann in his article as well as the 
feelings they inspire, | feel | cannot 
agree with one of the points made 
by the distinguished American jour- 
nafist. 
Mr. Lippmann writes : “... War bet- 
ween nuclear powers can no longer be 
an instrument of their national policy. 
This will still be the case even if, as 
is most probable, 2 considerable num- 
ber of states acquire nuclear weapons. 
For no nation can risk the use of these 
weapons anywhere because, having 
these weapons it is subject itself to 
fearful retaliation... Therefore, the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
23

The arms race, 
the gravest issue of our time 
prospect of averting great war by 
mutual deterrence is a reasonably 
good prospect.” 
Unfortunately, military conflicts have 
their own laws, or rather, they do not 
obey the laws of common sense. The 
events of last June in the Middle East 
are proof that recourse to arms 
between states or groups of states is 
neither Impossible nor infrequent. 
Can we really therefore be sure that 
if armed conflicts occurred between 
“small” nations possessing nuclear 
weapons that the deterrent factor 
would hold true and that these nations 
would not make use of every weapon 
in their arsenal ? 
| am more inclined to agree with 
another American journalist, John 
Gunther, when he says that in the 
event that all countries gained posses- 
sion of atomic weapons even the 
smallest country could spark off a 
world conflagration. 
Een a tiny country with a 
per capita revenue from 22 to 25 times 
smalier than that of the United States 
may soon be in a position, | believe, 
to produce atomic weapons. Today 
some 10 to 15 countries possess 
nuclear reactors destined for peaceful 
purposes. But technical advances 
and the dissemination of scientific data 
are such that, with the reduction in the 
cost of producing nuclear arms, soon 
there will be not just 10 to 15 countries 
but 50 or more potentially capable of 
undertaking the manufacture of wea- 
pons of mass destruction. 
For these reasons the conclusion of 
an agreement on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons seems to me 
particularly urgent. Most people are 
familiar with the arguments for and 
against this question. They have 
been voiced repeatedly at the Geneva 
disarmament meetings, in diplomatic 
circles and in the world press. The 
most telling argument against a non- 
proliferation treaty stresses that such 
a treaty would perpetuate the mono- 
poly in atomic weapons of the present 
nuclear nations. This overlooks the 
point that an agreement on the non- 
proliferation of nuclear weapons is not 
an end in itself but only a first indis- 
pensable step towards the total 
banning of these weapons and their 
destruction in arsenals everywhere in 
the world. Furthermore, should such 
a non-proliferation treaty become a 
The UNESCO Courier 2008 N°10 
reality, it is proposed that the non- 
nuclear powers would be completely 
guaranteed against any possible 
nuclear attack by a nuclear power. 
Another argument against non-pro- 
liferation holds that the banning of 
production of nuclear weapons (as 
well as the contro! necessary to 
enforce the ban) would hamper tech- 
nical development in the contracting 
countries by preventing them from 
using atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. It should not be difficult, 
however, to devise forms of centrol 
that would not prejudice a nation's 
industrial development. Furthermore, 
the pooling of knowledge and research 
in the peaceful use of atomic energy 
would increase as the possibility of its 
being employed in the manufacture of 
arms was eliminated. 
It is easy to understand—though not 
always easy to approve—the reasons 
that prompt nations to keep arms in 
their arsenals. But the sums spent 
are staggering. In 1964 the world 
poured down the drain the astronomi- 
cal sum of 120,000 million dollars for 
armaments. The figure is consider- 
ably higher today. If some imaginary 
inhabitant of another solar system 
was fo visit our planet he would no 
doubt find it hard to understand why 
we Earthlings squander our resources 
and energies so uselessly. 
The examples of Vietnam and the 
Middle East make it abundantly clear 
that in this day and age no problem 
can be resolved by resort to war, 
And even less so by resorting to 
nuclear weapons. The problem of 
armaments today and their destructive 
nature is thus the most poignant issue 
of our time, 
R 1967, the U.S.S.R. will 
spend 14,500 million roubles (13.2 per 
cent of its budget) on defence. (1) 
There are undoubtedly many ways in 
which this money could be usefully 
employed in the Soviet Union. The 
United States spends even huger sums 
on arms, including the war in Vietnam. 
  
(1) Editor's note: The U.S.S.R. does not 
include research and development costs in 
its defence budget. Total actual defence 
expenditure for 1966 has been estimated 
at over 35000 million dollars. (The 
exchange rate of the rouble is one rouble 
= 90 U.S. cents.) 
And it too still has many social prob- 
lems to solve, bottlenecks in educa- 
tion, pubtic health and science, where 
these resources now spent on arms, 
could be usefully employed. . 
On the assumption that arms expen- 
diture remained at the present level 
(which no one really wants), the Soviet 
Union will spend 230,000 million rou- 
bles in the course of the next 20 years. 
If general and complete disarmament 
were to become a reality, and suppos- 
ing even that 20 per cent of the money 
saved by disarmament were diverted 
for the developing countries, the 
U.S.S.R. would still have 230,000 
million roubles left over for useful 
purposes. The money could be spent 
for an infinite variety of purposes, to 
raise the standard of living of the 
Soviet people, to launch large-scale 
development projects in Siberia, irri- 
gate desert lands, etc... 
A jook at a map of world 
development shows us that entire 
continents are in need of resources 
and assistance to carry through their 
full development. To cite only one 
example, the harnessing of the world’s 
water resources could transform vast 
regions of our planet. In Asia, the 
Indus and the Mekong, the Tigris and 
Euphrates ; in Africa, the Nile and its 
tributaries, and the Congo; in Latin 
America, the Parana and the Amazon. 
Mankind is only now becoming 
aware of the great riches and possi- 
bilities at its disposal. Were these to 
be effectively exploited, they could 
eliminate hunger, sickness and many 
other problems due to low living 
standards, such as illiteracy which still 
affects many hundreds of millions of 
the inhabitants of developing countries. 
By the rational use of its energy and 
intelligence, mankind could fulfil its 
destiny at a much more rapid pace, 
and even on a universal scale now 
that man is moving beyond the limits 
of the earth's gravity. 
In ancient times, people used to 
dream about the “Golden Age”. But in 
the times of Plato or Thomas More, 
this was in fact a Utopia, a mere 
dream of happiness. Today, with the 
help of electronic machines we can 
calculate the extent to which progress 
in various spheres of human existence 
would be speeded up should an epoch 
of general peace and complete dis- 
armament be ushered in.
