It was a turning point in the his-
tory of attempts to safeguard 
shipwrecks and other submerged 
monuments when, on 2 January 
2009, the UNESCO Convention 
on the Protection of the Underwa-
ter Cultural Heritage entered into 
force. Adopted by Member States 
in 2001, this is the only convention 
that is specific to the underwater 
cultural heritage. Even so, it neither 
regulates the ownership of heritage 
nor changes maritime sovereignty 
zones. Its aim is to combat looting 
and extend to our underwater heri-
tage the same protection offered to 
sites on dry land. “From now on, it 
will be possible to offer legal pro-
tection to the memory of humanity 
that is buried at the bottom of the 
oceans, lakes and rivers, thus cur-
tailing the growing illicit trade by 
looters,” said UNESCO’s Director-
General, Koïchiro Matsuura. 
Archaeologists have been waiting 
a long time for international legisla-
tion such as this. “The 2001 Con-
vention is heaven’s gift for under-
water archaeologists,” says Robert 
Grenier, a well-known Canadian 
underwater archaeologist. This new 
instrument should also enable the 
public to get to know this little-known 
aspect of our heritage, which is so 
much more than a few shipwrecks 
at the bottom of the sea. Untold 
treasures lie in the depths, some-
times for thousands of years. And, 
while Atlantis was probably just a 
myth, entire stone-age landscapes, 
painted caverns and sacrificial sites 
are yielding their amazing secrets 
day after day. Take, for example, 
the ‘cenotes’ of Yucatan (Mexico), 
natural sinkholes that hold traces of 
Mayan sacrifices. The Chichen Itza 
cenote contained no fewer than 
120 sacrificed bodies.
A minefield
The UNESCO convention is, how-
ever, entering a minefield when it is 
applied to safeguard this fragile her-
itage. While land-based heritage is 
subject to increasing protection, the 
looting of our underwater heritage 
is growing at an alarming rate, and 
national legislation is very patchy. 
Treasure hunters and commercial 
enterprises, attracted by profit, are 
deserting sites on dry land for deep-
sea archaeology. Just one example 
is their interest in the precious car-
goes of the caravels and carracks, 
these jewels of the Portuguese fleet 
that plied the spice routes in the 
17th century. Commercial exploita-
tion of their wrecks off the coast of 
Mozambique, for example, is threat-
ening the only remaining historical 
evidence of their construction, as 
most of the documents from the era 
   The unesCo Convention on the protection of the underwater Cultural Heritage 
         is the first legal instrument to safeguard underwater archaeological sites on an international
   scale, providing protection against treasure-hunters, while regulating international cooperation.
beneaTh The waTer,  
heriTage in search of  
inTernaTional proTecTion
(•••)
Divers in a cenote in Mexico.

were destroyed in the 1755 Lisbon 
earthquake. 
Faced with protests from archae-
ologists and the suspicions of the 
authorities when approached for 
licenses to explore, private compa-
nies looking for wrecks are increas-
ingly proclaiming the scientific inter-
est of their research. But it is almost 
impossible to practice genuine ar-
chaeology when the real motive is 
profit, and shareholders, not an in-
formed public, are behind the work. 
As the celebrated Portuguese ar-
chaeologist, Francisco Alves, put 
it, “the archaeologist’s work is often 
like that of a detective. But what 
would we think of a detective who 
sells the victim’s watch to pay for 
his investigations?” 
Confronted with destruction and 
looting, the UNESCO Conven-
tion has added a series of rules in 
its Annex regarding archaeological 
exploration, which aim to act as 
an added safeguard and directive 
for national authorities. By impos-
ing ethical norms of protection, it 
should eventually eradicate purely 
commercial operations. 
The Convention has also been set 
up to provide a legal safeguard and 
to monitor the protection of sites, 
which is probably its most delicate 
task. In international waters, States 
have, with some exceptions, only 
a limited jurisdiction, which often 
restricts the application of national 
regulations to their own nationals 
or to vessels flying their flag. Ev-
ery time a commercial enterprise 
from a given country sets its sights 
on some article that another State 
thinks is valuable, international co-
operation becomes crucial for its 
protection. Hence the value of the 
Convention, which aims to regulate 
and improve the conditions of this 
cooperation.
Other threats,  
other solutions
Commercial excavations are not 
the only threat hanging over the 
relics located at the bottom of the 
(•••)
beneaTh The waTer, heriTage in search of inTernaTional proTecTion
seas, even if they are largely the rea-
son behind the Convention. Fool-
hardy tourists looking for souvenirs, 
the construction of ports and oil 
pipelines, mineral prospecting and 
trawler fishing are also threats. 
But satisfactory solutions can 
sometimes be found. Nord Stream 
AG, the company that built a gas 
pipeline in the Baltic Sea, recently 
had to open a breach in an ancient 
barrage made out of sunken Swed-
ish ships, preserved in the Bay of 
Greifswald, in northern Germany. 
This barrage dates back to the 
Great Northern War when, in 1715, 
the Swedish navy scuttled some 
twenty ships, each around 15 me-
tres long, in order to protect the 
bay. The construction company paid 
for the costs of archaeological re-
search and salvage, demonstrating 
that it is possible to find a balance 
between the need to safeguard the 
past and the needs of the present. 
The UNESCO Convention has the 
advantage of inviting its States Par-
ties to find solutions that limit dam-
age to the underwater heritage. 
There remain, of course, the in-
evitable threats posed by nature, 
such as erosion, tides, storms, 
tsunamis, etc. The 2001 Conven-
tion invites national governments 
to take measures to prevent or to 
reduce the impact of such phenom-
ena, by fencing off threatened sites, 
building cages, or covering them in 
sand. 
UNESCO and the European 
Union have carried out several 
studies on the effects of climate 
change on cultural heritage. And a 
project has also just been launched 
with the Sovrintendenza del Mare, 
in Sicily, to investigate the possi-
bility of preventing the destruction 
of coastal and underwater sites by 
earthquakes, under the framework 
of the Convention. The task is enor-
mous, but the Convention has the 
whole future before it.
Ulrike Koschtial 
(UNESCO) 
Wreck of the Thistlegorm, sunk by a German bomber in the Read Sea, during World War II.

Roman wreck near Pakostane (Croatia),  
protected by sand bags.
