Young mountain gorilla (Rwanda).



Saving 
our  
nearest 
relatives 
humanity’s closest relative, the gorilla, is in danger.  
development, poaching and war have been decimating 
one of the only animal species which, like us,  
can use tools. nevertheless, uneSco’s gorilla  
preservation projects have begun to bear fruit  
in this International Year of the gorilla, 2009.
The main objective of the International Year of the gorilla 
is to mobilize decision-makers and the public to save  
this great ape species, a species capable of intelligent 
thinking, 95% of whose dna is identical to ours.  
This is of vital importance as populations have been  
declining in recent decades.
focus
the others to feeding sites and 
takes responsibility for the safety 
and well-being of all. 
Younger males, called black-
backs, may serve as backup pro-
tection. Males will slowly begin 
to leave their original troop when 
they are about 11 years old, trav-
elling alone or with a group of 
other males for 2–5 years before 
they attract females to form a new 
group and start breeding. Goril-
las are vegetarian but silverbacks 
have been known to kill the young 
child of their predecessor. They 
will then mate with the female 
whose child they killed. 
Gorillas only breed every three 
or four years. Because of their mi-
gratory lifestyle, they require a lot 
every animal species is valuable 
and has a part to play in main-
taining the ecological balance 
of its natural habitat, but the 
cause of the gorilla elicits particular 
sympathy because they are so similar 
to us. So much so that their name, 
has its root the Greek word gorillai, 
meaning tribe of hairy women, used 
by the Carthaginian, Hanno the Navi-
gator, who sailed along the coast of 
West Africa in the 5th century B.C. 
and spotted hirsute creatures, some 
kind of ape if not actual gorillas, on 
his voyage 
In the absence of visual evi-
dence from Hanno’s journey, it is 
impossible to tell whether goril-
las are indeed the “hairy women” 
he named. Up to date complete 
data about the gorillas is still 
not always available, but modern 
science divides them into two 
species - Eastern and Western 
gorillas - and four subspecies 
(see box).
Social organization
Each subspecies has feeding, 
physiological and life style differ-
ences. But all gorillas are migra-
tory and live in groups of five to 
30 individuals dominated by one 
silverback adult male, typically 
12 years of age or older. The 
silverback is the strong, domi-
nant leader who is the centre of 
attention, makes all decisions, 
mediates conflicts, determines the 
movements of the group, leads 
(•••)

EclairaGE
The western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) 
is estimated to have declined by more than 60% over the 
last two decades due to death from hunting and disease, 
notably Ebola. Population was estimated at 100,000 in 
the 1980s, but populations which had not been count-
ed before were discovered in remote swamp forests in 
the northern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo 
bringing total estimates up to 150,000 - 200,000 mainly 
in Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, Con-
go, and Equatorial Guinea. The subspecies is the small-
est and lightest of the four subspecies. 
The cross river gorilla (Gorilla gorilla diehli) is a 
recently recognized subspecies of Western Gorilla liv-
ing in tropical and subtropical broadleaf forests at el-
evations of 200 to 2000 metres on the northern Cam-
eroon-Nigerian border in an area of less than 10,000 
km². They are found in eleven localities most of them 
connected by continuous forest. The subspecies, total-
ling a mere 300 individuals, is critically endangered. It is 
particularly shy of humans and only few direct sightings 
have been made. Most information on their ecology and 
behaviour derives from observations of sleeping nests, 
feeding trails and reports by local hunters. The main 
morphological difference between the Cross River 
Gorilla and the Western Lowland Gorilla concerns the 
shape of their heads.
The high forest mountain gorilla (Gorilla beringei 
beringei) is believed to total only 650 to 680 individu-
als, living in two isolated groups within protected areas 
in the Virunga Massif along the borders of the DRC, 
Rwanda, and Uganda, in the Virunga National Park 
(DRC), the Volcanoes National Park (Rwanda) and the 
Mgahinga Gorilla National Park (Uganda). A separate 
population of Mountain Gorillas is found in the Bwindi 
Impenetrable National Park in southwest Uganda. A 
2003 census of the Virunga Volcanoes Mountain Go-
rilla population showed a 17% increase since 1989. 
But the subspecies remains critically endangered due 
to habitat loss, poaching, human disease and war. It is 
very black and densely furred, with a broad face and 
massive jaws. The small of the back of mature males 
turns grey with age, hence the name of ‘silverback’ for 
mature males. 
eastern lowland gorillas (Gorilla beringei grau-
eri) have been severely affected by instability and war 
in much of its natural habitat since the 1990s. An in-
crease in hunting of Eastern Lowland gorillas has been 
observed in war-torn eastern DRC, and their habitat is 
under stress due to mining for coltan ore, agriculture 
and charcoal production. Anecdotal evidence sug-
gests a significant decline over the past 20-30 years. 
In the mid-1990s, population was estimated at 17,000. 
The Eastern Gorilla tends to be larger than the West-
ern, with longer, blacker hair. 
r. a.
modern science  
divides gorillas into two species  
- eastern and western gorillas -  
and four subspecies:  
western lowland gorillas,  
cross river gorillas, mountain gorillas  
and eastern lowland gorillas.
Four  
Subspecies  
of Gorillas  
Young lowland gorilla hitching a ride (Congo).

of space, which is why UNESCO 
favours the definition of large land-
scapes for their preservation, ar-
eas that include a wide buffer zone 
with biosphere reserves where peo-
ple can find sustainable livelihoods. 
Education projects to help the in-
habitants understand, respect and 
maximize the benefits of sustainable 
resource management are essential 
for the success of these preserva-
tion projects.
All species  
are important
Mambaele Mankoto of UNESCO’s 
Natural Science Sector is heartened 
by the recent increase observed in 
gorilla populations in the Virunga 
National Park, a UNESCO World 
Heritage site. This improvement 
can be attributed to ambitious pro-
grammes for conservation of biodi-
versity in regions of armed conflict 
launched by UNESCO in 2000 
with the United Nations Foundation 
and the European Union. The proj-
ects have focused heavily on help-
ing forest guards carry out their all-
important work. “But conflicts are 
still latent and we must not lower 
our guard,” cautions Mankoto, who 
highlights the need to convince 
donors to provide funds for proj-
ects that specifically target gorilla 
preservation. 
One way to reduce hunting for 
bushmeat and traditional medicine 
is to convince local populations 
that gorillas are worth more alive 
than dead. Conservation institu-
tions in the RDC and the Rwandan 
National Parks Office have con-
cluded an accord whereby gorillas 
that come from RDC to Rwanda 
are visited by tourists there and 
Rwanda pays a share of the profit, 
US$ 30,000 per annum on aver-
age, back to the RDC. Mankoto 
welcomes this as a fine example of 
transboundary cooperation within 
UNESCO’s mandate of peace-
building with the gorillas as am-
bassadors. 
Nevertheless, gorilla tourism must 
be managed with care, as contact 
with humans can have a negative 
impact on these great apes whose 
immune systems are unprepared 
for some of the diseases we carry. 
Humans also continue killing goril-
las not just for bushmeat but also 
for cultural reasons. While some 
people still believe that placing a 
gorilla bone in a baby’s bathwa-
ter will fortify the child, the major 
threats facing our closest animal 
cousins remain deforestation, 
road-building, traps laid for other 
animals and mining. 
Mankoto for his part hopes that 
the International Year of the Gorilla - 
launched by the United Nations En-
vironment  Programme’s Conven-
tion on Migratory Species (CMS), 
the UNEP/UNESCO Great Apes 
Survival Partnership (GRASP) and 
the World Association of Zoos and 
Aquariums (WAZA) - will serve as 
a plea for this animal which, in cap-
tivity, has proven it can acquire an 
impressive mastery of human sign 
language. 
In their natural habitat, gorillas 
provide valuable services in forest 
husbandry as they make clearings 
along their migratory path, allowing 
the sun to reach the underbrush, 
and digest seeds of species which 
they disseminate in their faeces. 
Mankoto reminds us of the need to 
resist anthropocentrism: “All spe-
cies are important; the loss of any 
species represents an impoverish-
ment of the environment — physical, 
cultural and spiritual.” 
Roni Amelan 
(UNESCO) 
Old Titus with a group of mountain gorillas (Congo).
(•••)

protecting gorillaS  
BeginS with education
like elephants, gorillas are migratory 
species that need wide areas.  
conserving such species is not about 
fencing large areas but about teaching 
populations to contribute  
to conservation through good  
territorial management policies.  
This requires educating  
the young and uneSco  
has not waited for the International 
Year of the gorilla to start this work.
Family of gorillas in Uganda.

The main axes for UNESCO’s  
activities in favour of the gorilla are 
its World Heritage Centre and the 
Man and the Biosphere (MAB)  
Programme. But education projects 
have also contributed to these  
programmes, particularly now, during 
the Decade for Education for  
Sustainable Development. 
UNESCO recently granted US  
$100,000 for GRASP scholarships  
for young researchers who spent  
two years studying issues pertaining  
to great apes. 
The Regional School on Integrated 
Management of Tropical Forests and 
Territories (ERAIFT) [Ecole Regionale 
post-universitaire d’ Amenagements 
et gestions Intégrés des Forets et 
Territories tropicaux] was created by 
UNESCO ten years ago at Kinshasa 
University with support from the RDC, 
the United Nations Development  
Programme, the European Union 
which has just announced a four 
million-Euro allocation within the 
framework of the 10th European  
Development Fund (2009-2013),  
Belgium, France and several partners 
such as the World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF). The school brings 
together young postgraduates  
specializing in human and  
social sciences with geographers,  
sociologists and economists along 
with agronomists, forest managers,  
biologists, and ecologists.  
They follow an 18-month Masters 
programme which includes six months 
of fieldwork. This allows for  
cross-disciplinary training, favouring  
a multidisciplinary grasp of issues 
which can help open the  
students’ eyes to new approaches.  
Eighty-one masters from 12 African 
countries have been trained to date 
along with three PhDs.  
A further 60 people will hopefully  
be trained by 2013. 
r. a.
