This is the twentieth time I have come 
to work with the Dogon painters of 
Koyo, high up on their table moun-
tain in the north of Mali. In the black 
of night, we all stretch out on mats 
outside the mud house set aside for 
me, in the centre of the village. The 
farmer-painters and I are exhausted, 
but happy with the poem-paintings 
that we have just made on cloth, un-
der the burning sun. The youngest 
of the painters is making tea. Our 
conversation turns to the ancestors. 
Suddenly there is a sharp pain 
in my left hand. I grab my torch. A 
white scorpion has just stung me. I 
kill it. I panic at first and imagine that 
it will all be over for me in an hour. 
Then I think that I have thirty min-
utes of – relative – peace before the 
convulsions start. So I ask the head 
of the village if he has any traditional 
antidote to the venom. “No,” he re-
plies, “just wait. You will see.” The 
conversation starts again. My hand 
then my arm feel as though they are 
on fire. But, two hours later, the pain 
has stopped. I fall into a deep sleep, 
with the head of the village stay-
ing to sleep beside me. A mystery. 
Three days later, all eight of us – 
the six painters, the chief and my-
self – reach the foot of the cliff at 
the top of the mountain, ten kilome-
tres from the village, where each 
monsoon storm turns into a mas-
sive waterfall. This place, where the 
water thunders, chants and sings 
almost all summer, is the source of 
many a legend. Caves protected 
by initiations bear ancient picto-
rial signs. But I know that they are 
also home to awesome cobras. 
I ask the painters if they have any 
medicine against their venom. 
“No. Sit down and we’ll explain.”
All of reality is speech
I will try to put together here 
what was passed on to me that 
morning, and so many times be-
fore, using the signs and sym-
bols that the painters draw when, 
in our poem-paintings, we tell of 
the profound life of this place. 
All of reality is speech; it is made 
and mellowed on the plateau at the 
top of the mountains. The beautiful 
round or flat stones are petrified, 
dense speech. Water is language 
laughing; the sky is its distant fore-
shadowing, the clouds its gestation 
and rain its joyful roar. The sown 
seed is a promised word: and, if 
the farmer sings, it increases its 
the monkeys, 
the scorpion 
And the snAke According to tradition, the cobra is the guardian 
of the Toro Tegu language spoken in Dogon country, in Mali.
For Koyo villagers, the top of the mountain embodies the power of the word. 
Coming down the mountain, the word becomes weaker.
(•••)
                  stone is petrified speech, water is 
language laughing, the sown seed, a promised 
word: every element of reality is an integral part 
of toro tegu, currently spoken by some 5000 
dogons in the north of Mali.

fertile strength. Here, the crops are 
farmed with the hoe and a song. 
The language of my compan-
ions, after all, is called Toro Tegu, 
“word of the mountain” and is one 
of the fifteen Dogon languages, 
with about 5000 native speak-
ers. The Dogon from this eth-
nic group call themselves Toro 
Nomu, “people of the mountain”. 
The speciality of the Koyo village 
community, about 500 individuals, 
is to energize the fertility of the word 
through farming practices and rites. 
The community is broken down into 
small groups of six to eight indi-
viduals, who are linked forever and 
share at least one meal a day to-
gether. There is the group respon-
sible for the collective grain stores, 
which are “reservoirs of the word”, 
the group responsible for rainmak-
ing rites, the group responsible for 
maintaining cliff paths, etc. Each 
group, of course, has its reference 
ancestor and only acts for the ben-
efit of the community as a whole. 
The dynamic harmony of reality is 
regularly recast through nocturnal 
singing and dancing by a special-
ized group of “women elders”. The 
choreography includes a regular, 
wide, horizontal sweep with the 
right arm, which signifies sow-
ing the word as if it were a seed.
The word at work
Since 2002, the painters, the head 
of the village and I – the poet of the 
written word – have formed a sup-
port group. We spread cloth or pa-
per onto the flat rocks, like the fine 
loam of the market gardens, then I 
lay the “seeds” of the poem, while 
they lay the “seeds” of pictorial 
signs. These textiles and sheets of 
paper are then exhibited all over the 
world, bringing income, a “harvest” 
that feeds the village. We have been 
able to build a school, five reser-
voirs, which have doubled the area 
under cultivation, three “Painters’ 
Houses” which can be visited, etc., 
as part of a development project 
for the village [see ‘Koyo, a place 
for dialogue between two cultures’, 
UNESCO Courier , n° 4, 2008]. 
Our group has two reference an-
cestors, because it soon spawned 
other groups, responsible for main-
taining the school, the “Painters’ 
Houses” and other fruits of our 
development project. “We have de-
cided that you have become Dog-
on,” the painters tell me, “and you 
must add the names of these two 
ancestors to yours. The last time 
a foreigner was allowed to join us 
was five centuries ago. He is the 
one who painted the symbols in 
one of the caves near to the great 
waterfall. He is one of our two ref-
erence ancestors. But now he is 
the last but one foreigner to be ac-
cepted, because you are the last.” 
According to Toro Nomu, every-
thing on the mountaintop is the 
word at work and in harmony with 
The “Painters’ House” in the Dogon village of Boni. At right, the snake motif.



(•••)
itself. Animals are also elements 
of this. But, in contrast, everything 
that is beneath these high plateaux 
– like a ravine, a gorge or even a 42 
kilometre-wide plain, separating the 
two plateaux – bears the generic 
name of pondo: here the word is 
weak, shapeless, undulating, shift-
ing. Above all, it is the word of the 
nomadic herders, who have held feu-
dal rule over the plain for centuries 
“Our hordes of monkeys shake 
the word into confusion”, the paint-
ers continue, “but the scorpions 
and cobras are creatures that the 
word uses to protect itself. If they 
come across a stranger, they kill 
him. But they never attack us”. 
“Ah, that is why the scorpion 
stung me the other evening!” 
“No, no, you still haven’t un-
derstood. Make an effort! You 
speak Toro Tegu. You have be-
come Dogon. The scorpion 
made a mistake when he stung 
you. Who is dead, him or you?” 
Yves Bergeret, French poet
the monkeys, the scorpion And the snAke
