(•••)
champagne eT soie : un mariage royal
if champagne is the king of wines,  
thai silk is the queen of silks – this 
could be the motto of a new partnership 
between the inter-professional  
committee for the wines of  
champagne (france) and the Queen 
sirikit institute for sericulture  
(thailand). Both are powerful symbols 
of their respective countries, yet, both 
are also victims of their own success – 
counterfeiting and misappropriation  
of the name are the major threats that 
this partnership hopes to defeat.
What do champagne and silk have 
in common? An aura of charm, a long 
history, a close link to their land of origin, 
strict rules of manufacture and … coun-
terfeits. 
French champagne is protected by a 
whole series of laws, which come under 
the collective title of the “Champagne 
Code”, which precisely defines its origin 
and methods of production. But the 
Inter-professional Champagne Commit-
tee has to fight tooth and nail to avoid 
its Geographic Indication* being used 
illegally. The organization, which dates 
back to 1930 and the Commission for 
Propaganda and Defence of the Wines 
of Champagne, has to ensure that no 
sparkling wine anywhere in the world can 
benefit from this name. It is a difficult task, 
because the prestigious name of “Cham-
pagne” is a superb sales feature and is 
therefore very attractive to counterfeiters. 
Meanwhile, the relatively young Thai 
Institute of Sericulture, established in 
2002, aims to obtain legal recognition of 
the Geographic Indication of Lamphun 
province as producer of traditional Thai 
silk. The renowned Lamphun silk bro-
cade, traditionally woven on handlooms 
in a complicated process from a combi-
nation of silk thread and gold and silver 
thread, is much sought after by leading 
couturiers and interior designers through-
out the world. 
Despite its industrialization, Thai silk 
making still depends to a large extent 
on the nimble fingers of peasants. Silk 
farming and unwinding the silk, thread 
by thread from the cocoons are still the 
preserve of a myriad of small producers. 
And most of the weaving workshops that 
buy the silk thread still use wooden looms 
and other traditional techniques. 
In 2007, the Champagne Committee 
responded positively to an invitation 
from the Queen Sirikit Institute to form 
a partnership and has since become 
an advocate for Thai silk. Thanks to its 
support, the Geographic Indication (GI) 
of Lamphun silk is in the process of be-
ing registered with the European Union. 
This collaboration, it is hoped, will draw 
the public’s attention to the notion of 
Geographic Indication and help preserve 
the authenticity of these products, which 
have become icons of French and Thai 
culture. 
Katerina markelova, 
UNESCO Courier
