T story of laborious efforts in a wide 
range of practical and concrete 
areas of international cooperation. 
Conferences, intergovernmental 
committees and groups of experts 
met in Geneva to discuss topics as 
diverse as health and social affairs, 
transport and communications, 
economic and financial affairs and 
intellectual cooperation. The Mem-
ber States ratified more than one 
hundred conventions. Although the 
League failed in its primary mis-
sion, which was to avoid world war 
and ensure collective security, it 
achieved results in developing in-
ternational technical cooperation. 
One of the miracles of archives is 
that beyond stereotypes and estab-
lished ideas, they provide evidence, 
solid ground and inspiration for 
true historical research, which may 
memories of broken dreams  
and inTacT hopes
he League of Nations emerges 
in the collective remembrance as 
a “Boulevard of Broken Dreams”, 
better known for its failures than its 
successes. The powerlessness of 
the League in front of the Japanese 
aggression in Manchuria, Italy’s in-
vasion of Abyssinia (Ethiopia), the 
Spanish Civil War and Germany’s 
annexation of Austria are some ex-
amples. Add to this a slight touch of 
bureaucratic nightmare, as depict-
ed wonderfully and without mercy in 
Swiss author Albert Cohen’s “Belle 
du Seigneur”, and the shining glass 
palace above Lac Léman seems to 
float away towards the white moun-
tains in the distant horizon, beyond 
reality. 
All this may be true, but there is 
more to the story. The history of 
the League of Nations is also the 
eventually change our perceptions 
of the past. 
The archives of the League of Na-
tions, added to the Memory of the 
World Register in July 2009, repre-
sent 2.175 linear meters, approxi-
mately 15 million documents. They 
reflect the political mandate and the 
activities of the League, such as its 
work on peaceful solutions to ter-
ritorial and other disputes through 
conciliation and arbitration. One 
successful example is the Swedish-
Finnish agreement on the state of 
the Åland Islands in the Baltic Sea. 
This was the first European interna-
tional agreement (1921) concluded 
directly through the League. The 
archives of the League of Nations 
tell the story of the difficult process 
leading to a solution to this prob-
lem. 
Successes and failures of the 
League to reach peaceful settle-
ments to international disputes and 
its work on other matters relating to 
peace and security are also reflec- 
ted in archives on the Mosul dispute 
between Turkey and Iraq (1926), the 
Chaco War between Paraguay and 
Bolivia (1932), armed clashes be-
tween Greece and Bulgaria (1925) 
and investigations on the existence 
of slavery in Liberia (1930).
The Power  
of the Record
The most fascinating thing about the 
League of Nations archives is the in-
credible variety of issues dealt with 
in them. International trade in opium 
and sexual slavery were among the 
issues, as was the important matter 

                                to grasp the complexity of history, it is necessary to confront all types 
              of documents – from personal archives to international collections. 
                the inscription on the Memory of the world register of the League of nations archives
                           (1919-1946) has opened up new perspectives on historiographic research.
Speech by Haile Selassie, emperor of Ethiopia, at the 20th Assembly  
of the League of Nations (30.06.1935).

of refugees and their resettlement. 
In the spring of 1920, Fridtjof Nans-
en - a Norwegian scientist, Arctic 
explorer and politician - was ap-
pointed as League of Nations High 
Commissioner for Prisoners of War 
and appointed by the League of Na-
tions to facilitate the repatriation of 
many prisoners of war. Within two 
years, Nansen arranged for approxi-
mately 450,000 ex-prisoners of war 
from 26 countries to be returned 
to their homes. The “Nansen pass-
port” (introduced in 1922) was the 
first internationally recognized iden-
tity card for stateless persons. This 
very effective work, which changed 
the life of hundreds of thousands of 
people, resulted in the settlement of 
Russian refugees, then Armenian, 
Assyrian and Greek refugees from 
Turkey and still later, in the 1930s, 
refugees from Germany, Austria, 
Czechoslovakia. In this work one 
finds the roots of what the UNHCR 
is doing today. 
Among other major achievements 
documented in the archives are the 
League of Nations Economic and Fi-
nancial Organisation, which worked 
for international economic coopera-
tion, the financial reconstruction of 
Austria and Hungary after World 
War I and the tremendous work of 
the League’s Health Section, the 
forerunner to the WHO, with the 
standardization of vaccines, such 
as diphtheria, tetanus and tubercu-
losis. 
The archives of international docu-
ments also invite the curious re-
searcher to track the roots of ideas 
and concepts that have become 
popular and influential. The notion 
of cultural diversity, for example, is 
closely related to what in a file of 
the International Institute for Intel-
lectual Cooperation (agency of the 
League of Nations whose archives 
are in the custody of the UNESCO 
Archives) was called “particularités 
culturelles” (cultural characteris-
tics). Other United Nations’ ideas 
and notions, which have had a ma-
jor impact, such as cultural heritage 
or sustainable development, can 
also be traced back in archives of 
international organizations in differ-
ent parts of the world.
Perspectives
The inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives in their totality in the 
Memory of the World Register is 
a significant event because of the 
implied recognition of the value of 
archives of international organiza-
tions. It also highlights the impor-
tance of preserving archives kept in 
their integral, original context as part 
of Humanity’s common heritage. 
Among the perspectives of the 
inclusion in the Register are the 
questions that it raises for historical 
research: How can the archives of 
organizations that often aspire to 
contribute to lofty ideals, including 
the creation of a Parliament of Man, 
be brought together with sources 
at the micro level? History of migra-
tion is an example of a topic where 
consultation of archives and docu-
ments at all levels, from the indi-
vidual to the international, can lead 
to extremely interesting insights for 
researchers. Historians are already 
addressing the challenges of re-
flecting on the interplay of univer-
sality and diversity in transnational 
relations; how do the local, national, 
regional and international levels in-
teract? Many different types of ar-
chival collections and sources need 
to be combined to give a better 
basis for grasping the complexity 
of history. It is one of the merits of 
the inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives in the Memory of the 
World Register that they and other 
archives of intergovernmental and 
international organizations become 
more visible. 
The inclusion of the League of Na-
tions archives will hopefully lead to 
more attention being given to the 
archives of other international or-
ganizations. Already, the photo and 
film archives of the United Nations 
Relief and Works Agency for Pales-
tine Refugees (UNRWA) were in-
scribed in the Register at the same 
time as the League of Nations ar-
chives. These audiovisual archives 
testify strongly and effectively to the 
human disaster following the Pales-
tinian exodus and the relief work 
carried out by the UN. Other ar-
memories of broken dreams and inTacT hopes
The UNESCO Courier 2009 N°9
Cover of the Nansen Passport for refugees.

Palestinian refugee camp set up  
by the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency (UNRWA) on the east bank  
of the River Jordan.

chives of international organisations 
provide evidence on human rights 
issues, international efforts to com-
bat diseases, labour regulations, 
children’s conditions, intellectual 
cooperation, press, information and 
communication history and more or 
less every other aspect of human 
life. Just take UNESCO’s archives, 
where more than 10,000 linear me-
ters of archives bear witness to the 
multifaceted international coopera-
tion on culture, sciences, communi-
cation and education.
Jens Boel, 
UNESCO’s Chief Archivist 
