F heat away from earth’s surface with 
reflectors; pouring iron into the ocean 
to boost phytoplanktons that would 
gobble up the carbon; and so on. The 
problem with this is that, in typically 
seeking technological solutions to the 
problem, one arrives at relief but rarely 
a cure. If one is overweight, diet pills or 
surgery are hardly a lasting solution. By 
the same token, if we are producing 
too much carbon, finding new ways 
to store excess carbon is not a last-
ing solution. The problem is not merely 
capturing the billions of tons of carbon 
that we produce but to cut down on 
activities that will produce carbon and 
other gasses that contribute to global 
warming. In other words, co-existing 
with the natural environment rather 
than dominating it and having natural 
spaces that can absorb the effects 
of the range of human activities and 
by-products, including carbon.
Living laboratories  
for sustainable  
development
These ideas were central to the 
creation of biosphere reserves. 
Biosphere reserves in their child-
hood have faced earthquakes, fires, 
floods, mass migrations, warfare, 
clIMate change 
bogeyMan  
In your  
neIghbourhood
The Sundarbans (Bangladesh, India), a World Heritage Site, 
was ravaged by cyclone Sidr in November 2007.
loods, droughts, entire islands and 
coasts drowning in seawater, cities 
trapped in hothouses, wildfires, entire 
continents turned into deserts, ecosys-
tems destroyed in a snap of a geologi-
cal finger – simply, the natural world 
unleashing its wrath. Climate change 
is now nature’s bogeyman, stalking us 
and dredging up our greatest fears. 
Yet, climate change is not really a bo-
geyman that has just decided to ran-
domly unleash his fury and is now walk-
ing up our doorstep. Climate change 
is more like your next-door neighbour 
that kept on sending you polite notes 
that your oak tree was overtaking his 
yard, which you promptly threw in 
the waste bin. Now, the oak tree has 
crashed through your neighbour’s liv-
ing room and he is coming after you 
and your tree with a chainsaw. 
Current climate change findings are 
not revolutionary. Scientists have been 
sounding the alarm for decades. Over 
the past century the average global 
temperature has increased by 0.75° C 
and is expected to increase between 
1 and 5.8° C by the year 2100. 
Some have argued that technology 
got us into this ecological mess and 
it will save us from climate change. 
Some have suggested: deflecting 
(•••)
                                giam siak Kecil – bukit batu, indonesian 
         site that has just joined the World network of biosphere 
reserves,  will become a “living laboratory” for sustainable 
         development. solutions for climate change 
              will be devised and tested.
and other calamities. Now, nearly 
forty years old, biosphere reserves 
are tackling the biggest challenge 
of their lives – climate change. 
Biosphere reserves are fitting tools 
for reducing and trying to cope with 
global warming. Just the network of 
biosphere reserves in Asia and the 
Pacific represents over 47 million 
hectares, an area corresponding to 
about one hundredth of the entire 
continent. This is a natural sponge 
that absorbs a lot of carbon. We 
now know that of the 32 billion tons 
of CO2 that are produced, natural 
ecosystems absorb about 18 billion 
tons. Without these natural spong-
es, the world would be in an even 
direr ecological situation. 
In addition, biosphere reserves are 
natural spaces that buffer against 
the constant whirl and noise of 
development and provide key lo-
cal environmental services such as 
keeping water clean, maintaining 
healthy soil, protecting wildlife and 
plants, maintaining pollination and 
seed propagation systems, among 
others. They are reminders that de-
velopment needs a partner in con-
servation. 

Finally, they serve as “living labo-
ratories” for sustainable develop-
ment. Climate change mitigation 
and adaptation efforts can be tried 
and tinkered with in biosphere re-
serves. Successful efforts then can 
be applied to other reserves and 
non-reserves.
Riau saved?
This is the case for Indonesia’s new 
biosphere reserve, Giam Siak Kecil 
– Bukit Batu (GSK-BB), which has 
just joined the World Network. The 
site, in Riau province east of Suma-
tra island, represents 705,271 hect-
ares and contains significant areas 
of peat swamp and lowland forests. 
These are not only key carbon sinks 
but also contain key endangered 
wildlife species as the Sumatran 
tiger and elephant, sun bear, tapir, 
and several globally important leaf 
monkeys. 
Like other biosphere reserves, the 
new site contains a protected core 
area, a buffer zone that can support 
sustainable human activities, and a 
transition area, with resources avail-
able to all. The core area of the re-
serve supports an important water 
reservoir supplying the communi-
ties and economies that occupy the 
transition areas and buffer zone. 
The latter is suitable for ecotourism, 
plant collection, and other small en-
terprise ventures that will contribute 
to sustainable local economies and 
environment. 
The management plan of this re-
serve will put in place a programme 
that aims to strengthen environ-
mental and economic security of lo-
cal communities by supporting and 
promoting innovative solutions that 
attempt to mitigate and adapt to cli-
mate change effects. 
Does this mean that the wildlife 
and swamp forests of Riau are now 
safe, and people of Riau ready to 
embrace sustainable develop-
ment? Hardly. More than half of the 
Sumatran peat swamp forest eco-
region has been cleared in the past 
two decades, and swamps drained 
for transmigration settlements and 
development projects. Local com-
munities know little about sustain-
able development or biosphere re-
serves. They just want to feed their 
families. But at the same time, the 
very activities that feed their families 
An example of illegal 
logging at Sumatra 
(Indonesia).
clIMate change bogeyMan In your neIghbourhood

View of the centre of Siam Giak Kecil Biosphere Reserve, Bukit Batu.

is investing in research into sustain-
ably harvesting plant material found 
in the reserve for medicinal purposes. 
Communities and the private sector 
will be directly involved in propagat-
ing, harvesting and marketing prod-
ucts through a planned “Biosphere 
Product” labeling programme. 
There is no one solution to climate 
change. It is a challenge that requires 
political, economic, technological and 
social solutions that come together. 
Biosphere reserves like the one in 
Sumatra need to innovate and push 
for sustainable living to address not 
only climate change, but the way in 
which we perceive the natural world. 
Robert Lee, 
conservation biologist, 
deputy director of the UNESCO 
Jakarta office (Indonesia)
clIMate change bogeyMan In your neIghbourhood
today will likely lead to suffering to-
morrow. 
Now is the time to work with these 
communities, government and the 
private sector to develop ideas and 
activities that support people in their 
ecosystems. At present, stakehold-
ers are exploring ways to provide 
economic and social benefits to the 
people living in and around the bio-
sphere reserve. For example, the In-
donesian Academy of Sciences (LIPI) 
(•••)
