In June, the World Heritage Committee made the decision to withdraw the Dresden Elbe Valley from the list of World Heritage sites.
A BrIdgE TO NOwHErE 
in june, the dresden elbe valley, germany, was withdrawn from the list of World heritage sites.  
the construction of the Waldschlösschen bridge altered the cultural landscape and integrity of the site 
as defined by the list. this move, unprecedented in europe, has shaken german public opinion.
of having “walked into disaster with 
its eyes wide open. This is a black 
day for the state of Saxony and for 
Germany, as a country that places 
great emphasis on culture. 
In fact it had been clear for years 
that this day was bound to come.
An old controversial 
project
The bone of contention is the 
Waldschlösschen Bridge over the 
river Elbe, the plans for which have 
existed since the 1990s, and been 
a subject of controversy from the 
start. A four-lane motorway is to lead 
across it. The bridge is supposed to 
link the eastern and south-eastern 
parts of Dresden with the north, 
taking some of the load off the four 
bridges in the inner city. 
For the World Heritage Committee 
this bridge was the reason for with-
drawing the status of world heritage 
site from the Dresden Elbe Valley. 
The explanation is that by building 
the bridge, Dresden has failed to 
preserve the “outstanding universal 
by decision of the World Heri-
tage Committee, the Dresden 
Elbe Valley has ceased to be 
a world heritage site. Fourteen mem-
bers of the Committee voted in fa-
vour of delisting it, 5 against, with 2 
abstentions. 
This is only the second time ever 
that a World Heritage Site has had 
its status revoked, the first being the 
Arabian Oryx Sanctuary, Oman, in 
2007. 
“Every time we fail to preserve a site, 
we share the pain of the State Party,” 
declared María Jesús San Segundo, 
the Ambassador and Permanent Del-
egate of Spain to UNESCO, chair of 
the 33rd session of the Committee, 
which met in Seville, Spain, from 22 
to 30 June of this year. Francesco 
Bandarin, Director of the World Heri-
tage Centre, noted with regret that 
“The work of UNESCO is to add 
properties to the World Heritage List 
so as to promote their preservation, 
not to drop them off the List.” 
When the news became public 
townspeople congregated outside 
Dresden’s world-famous Church of 
Our Lady holding up signs that read 
“What an embarrassment, Dres-
den!” Germany’s transport minister 
Wolfgang Tiefensee said: “This is 
very black day for Dresden and for 
Germany as a country that values 
culture highly. I deeply regret that 
it has come to this. Saxony and 
the city of Dresden had more than 
enough time to reach a compromise 
with UNESCO.” 
Foreign minister Frank-Walter 
Steinmeier was concerned that the 
decision by UNESCO was “not 
good news”. An understatement. 
Olaf Zimmermann, chief executive 
of the German Cultural Council, 
was scathing in his reproaches: 
“Through its stubbornness, Dres-
den has done Germany, as a coun-
try that holds culture in high es-
teem, a real disservice. Germany 
has been disgraced in the face of 
the world.” And Eva-Maria Stange, 
who is the chairwoman of the Ger-
man National Committee for the 
Preservation of Historic Monu-
ments and the Minister of Art of the 
state of Saxony accused Dresden (•••)

value” of the cultural landscape in 
the Elbe Valley in the way it was in-
scribed on the World Heritage List. 
Dresden was pronounced a world 
heritage site in 2004, having been 
nominated two years previously. 
Although the planned bridge was 
actually mentioned in the nomina-
tion file, its described location was 
incorrect; the bridge was said to be 
about “5 kilometres down the river 
from the centre”. In actual fact, the 
bridge is 2.5 kilometres upriver. 
In the spring of 2004, planning ap-
proval was granted for the bridge. 
With this, all the legal hurdles had 
been taken. But the start of con-
struction was repeatedly delayed on 
account of planning errors and nu-
merous lawsuits, as well as changes 
on the German political scene. Fi-
nally, it was decided to hold a public 
referendum that was to determine 
whether or not to go ahead. 
And so it was that in February 2005 
the citizens of Dresden voted on the 
construction of the Waldschlöss-
chen Bridge. The result: two thirds 
of the votes cast were in favour of 
building the bridge, though turnout 
was a meagre 50.8 percent. The 
information leaflet published in con-
nection with the referendum includ-
ed references to the building code 
and the fact that planning approval 
had already been given – which 
means that in actual fact the refer-
endum was not a direct vote on the 
issue but a request to confirm the 
existing parliamentary decision.
2006 : Dresden in peril
However, what the citizens of Dres-
den could not be aware of at that 
time was that building the bridge 
might threaten the city’s status as a 
world heritage site. The incorrect de-
tails about the location of the bridge 
were not discovered and corrected 
until October 2005. UNESCO 
then declared, for the first time, in 
2006 that the bridge was irreconcil-
able with world heritage status and 
threatened to de-list the property 
if it was indeed built. The Dresden 
Elbe Valley was put on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger, while at 
the same time the city was urged to 
submit an alternative concept that 
would be compatible with the re-
quirements of a world heritage site. 
Over the ensuing months, the city 
council and the regional council 
continued to argue over the con-
struction of the bridge, several court 
rulings were handed down, and the 
search for an alternative solution also 
failed. UNESCO decided to leave 
Dresden on the World Heritage List 
for one more year, but called upon 
the city once again to come up with 
alternatives. 
In November 2007, various actions 
brought by conservation groups hav-
ing been dismissed, the construc-
tion of the bridge began. UNESCO 
reacted immediately. “We asked for 
the construction of the bridge to be 
stopped and the area to be re-nat-
uralised”, says Francesco Bandarin. 
Further lawsuits followed; a new ref-
erendum, this time on a tunnel as an 
alternative to the bridge, was reject-
ed by the then mayor. The argument 
between the city council, the state 
directorate, the regional council and 
the mayor raged on. 
In March 2009, having dismissed 
several actions filed by conservation 
groups, the Dresden Administrative 
Court declared: “The tunnel solution 
does not represent a preferable al-
ternative.” A tunnel would “consider-
ably impair” the protected lowland 
meadows. However the court ruling 
did not take into account the UNES-
CO issue. 
Bandarin considers the entire pro-
cedure a bad idea: “I don’t think 
these decisions should be taken by 
the courts. This is a purely techni-
cal matter. Solutions to engineering 
problems should be left to engineer-
ing projects.

Semper Opera House, Dresden.

The cultural landscape of Dresden Elbe  
Valley is crowned by the Pillnitz Palace.
© Staatliche Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen

Now the UNESCO decision has 
been taken and Dresden’s current 
mayor Helma Orosz – who has 
been in office since October 2008 
– is having to carry the can for all the 
harm done by years of ignorance, 
small-mindedness and intransigence. 
“Years of communication problems 
between all the parties involved have 
not been helpful,” Orosz criticises. 
“Instead of admitting their mistakes, 
people kept putting the blame on 
each other. That led to rifts between 
the citizens, which I deeply regret.” 
The decision by UNESCO is, she 
says, a serious defeat for a town like 
Dresden – though she would not go 
so far as to call it a disgrace. “The 
majority of people in Dresden want 
the bridge. To me the referendum 
in 2005 was a legitimate decision. I 
am bound by the legal circumstanc-
es – that is a local politician’s job.” 
“She was in fact bound to the ref-
erendum,” says Francesco Bandarin 
– “but only until 2008, as the valid-
ity is three years.” After that, he be-
lieves, Orosz could have revoked 
the decision or, as he suggested, 
“organize[d] a new referendum with 
the ‘right question’: Do you want to 
have the bridge and lose the World 
Heritage Site title?”
To back up her conviction, Orosz 
cites further surveys carried out by 
various media during her term in of-
fice. In each case, a majority of re-
spondents spoke out in favour of 
the bridge – though always in con-
nection with preserving the status 
of world heritage site. “But,” Orosz 
notes, “the surveys also showed 
that if that were not possible then 
people would support the bridge 
without the title.” 
After taking office, Orosz imme-
diately contacted UNESCO, hop-
ing that the organization could be 
persuaded to move on the issue. In 
vain. According to the Mayor, it be-
came clear in Seville that the crite-
ria for awarding the status of world 
heritage site were not realistic and 
needed to be revised. “I spoke with 
representatives from other coun-
tries that were on the Heritage 
Sites in Peril list. In all cases it be-
came clear that the assessment 
was becoming increasingly rigid,” 
she says. “We cannot allow a mod-
ern infrastructure to be seen as a 
problem when it comes to recogn-
ising a world heritage site.” 
Bandarin disagrees: “As I ex-
plained many times, the bridge was 
incompatible because Dresden 
was inscribed as a cultural land-
scape, not as an historic city. As an 
historic city it would not have the 
values for inscription, as it was al-
most completely destroyed. Being 
a cultural landscape, the integrity is 
what matters, and the bridge breaks 
that. Also, the proposed project has 
a very heavy, old-fashioned design. 
The quality of the design matters 
too.” 
Orosz views the fact that many 
members of the World Heritage 
Committee voted against the deci-
sion to de-list the site as confirma-
tion that at UNESCO, too, people 
are starting to reconsider the crite-
ria. She says, “I am grateful that the 
members of the committee reached 
their decision with some degree of 
concern. The vote shows that there 
is a conviction deep inside that the 
city is capable and worthy of being 
a world heritage site.”
The door 
 isn’t irrevocably closed
It is indeed true that the World 
Heritage Committee has left it open 
for Dresden to present a new nomi-
nation. “The door is not shut”, said 
Françoise Rivière, UNESCO As-
sistant Director-General for Cul-
ture, in Seville. However the pro-
ceedings would have to be started 
from the beginning and the new 
nomination must be limited to one 
part of the cultural landscape of 
the Elbe Valley. Francesco Ban-
darin states that this would re-
quire “completely new nomination 
of the site, obviously with differ-
ent perimeters and values. This 
will take time and will be carefully 
scrutinized.” 
Helma Orosz is confident: 
“UNESCO has built a bridge for 
Dresden to cross – and this time 
the expression is fitting. The city 
is to be given another chance. I 
think a new nomination is pos-
sible – provided the majority of 
Dresden’s citizens want it.” 
It seems they do: a survey carried 
out by the newspaper “Sächsis-
che Zeitung” on 29 June among 
501 citizens found that almost 
two thirds of them wanted Dres-
den to submit a new nomination. 
Just before UNESCO proclaimed 
its decision, it was a different mat-
ter: on 20 June, the same news-
paper had already done an opin-
ion poll. At that time, 57 percent 
of Dresdeners felt they could do 
without the title of World Heritage 
Site. Public opinion is changing in 
Dresden. 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online 
(Germany), correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier
(•••)
forum
brief description  
of the site 
The cultural landscape  
of Dresden Elbe Valley extends 
some 18 km along the river.  
It features low meadows, and is 
crowned by the Pillnitz Palace 
and the centre of Dresden with its 
numerous monuments and parks  
dating from the 16th century. 
Some old villages have retained 
their historic structure and  
elements from the industrial  
revolution, notably the 147-m  
Blue Wonder steel bridge. The 
passenger steamships and the 
shipyard, dating from the early  
20th century, are still in use.
