Shortly after the Khmer Rouge 
gained power in 1975 they 
converted an abandoned high 
school into a prison and inter-
rogation centre. Under the control of Ka-
ing Guek Eav, also known as “Duch”, it 
became known to local workers as kon-
laenh choul min dael chenhmeaning liter-
ally “the place where people go in but 
never come out.” From factory workers, 
students, academics and monks to high 
ranking party officials and Westerners, 
anyone suspected of opposition to the 
party was detained. Over the four years 
of its existence only a handful of those 
who entered came out alive. 
Suspects were often brought in with 
their families, each systematically pho-
tographed and documented. Kept un-
der strict regulations, prisoners were 
shackled to walls or long iron bars and 
forbidden to speak, kept alive on mere 
spoonfuls of rice porridge and soup. Un-
der torture they were forced to confess 
their “crimes” and name their “collabora-
tors”. Eventually, they died under torture, 
succumbed to illness, or were marched 
to nearby fields to be executed. 
While the inmates are long gone, the ma-
jority of original documents remain, repre-
senting a unique witness to the regime’s. 
atrocities. Over 5000 photographs and 
4000 confessions are stored in the Tuol 
Sleng Genocide Museum and its ar-
chive, along with biographical records 
of prisoners, guards and officials and 
many of the original torture instruments. 
These are crucial evidence in the current 
Khmer Rouge trials and are unremitting 
illustration of one of the worst tragedies 
of the 20th century. 
David Jackman, 
UNESCO Courier 
Women prisoners at S-21.

The place where people go in  
buT never come ouT
under the Khmer rouge over 15,000 people were  
murdered at the infamous “security prison 21 (s-21)”  
at tuol sleng. the site has since become a museum  
and its archives were added this year  
to the Memory of the world register.
HuMan rigHts arCHives in CaMBodia 
The man who discovered The archives of Terror
