The UNESCO Gift Coupons Programme has made this discussion group at the Bombay City Social Education Centre possible.



India is a young nation, but it has inherited prodigious, eco-
nomic and educational problems which affect nearly 350 mil-
lion people. Our illiteracy figure is as high as 85%. Though 
70% of our people work on agriculture, we are short of food 
grain. Our standard of living is low. These are a few illustra-
tions. Our leaders are aiming at building up a welfare state, 
at improving agriculture, at industrializing the country. We 
have undertaken schemes for large-scale irrigation, scien-
tific research, and are building up technical institutions to 
train scientific and technical personnel. And so we look to 
UNESCO for all the assistance it may render us in transfor- 
ming ourselves. 
India has been a foundation member of UNESCO, whose 
objectives have always appealed to the Indian mind and con-
science. The delegations to UNESCO included some of our 
foremost scientists and scholars. We have set up a National 
Commission to cooperate with UNESCO and carry out its 
principles in our country. Above all, India believes in the heal-
ing power of the principles of UNESCO. We live in an age 
which is torn by conflict, fear and hatred. If we look below the 
surface of political events we become aware of the massive 
emotional currents which are working to produce a new life 
in society. At the heart of the nature of things, there is always 
a dream. The greatest gift of life is the dream of a higher way 
of living. At the heart of the universe there is this dream of 
justice for all men.  When the framework of society becomes 
a cramped prison, it explodes by the explosive power latent 
in society. This is revolution. And every revolution causes suf-
fering to innocent people, who have to pay for the atrocities 
and arrogance, laziness and selfishness of the forerunners 
or leaders. This does not, however, justify embracing social 
systems that cramp the free spirit of the individual. Democ-
racy is a balance between the organizing power of the state 
and the enterprise of the individual.  Enterprise, adventure 
is what saves civilization from staleness, from boredom. A 
civilization that is adventurous is free, vigorous, and creative. 
Where adventure is lacking, we have life without depth; litera-
ture without spirit, science concerned with the elaboration of 
details, art busy with trivialities.  The spirit of man craves for 
freedom, for co-operation. We must choose between wisdom 
or folly, co-operation or extinction. No nation has a monopoly 
of either wisdom or folly. UNESCO attempts to work for a 
just and enduring peace, for constructive adjustment or con-
flicting interests. Humanity’s inability, nay refusal, to use the 
UNESCO method and deal with world problems in a civilized 
way is the most distressing feature of our time. India believes 
in UNESCO, in the paths of peace and co-operation.  We 
are using all the instruments, the visual arts, theatre, dance, 
music, cinema, wireless etc., for this one supreme purpose of 
fostering the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind. 
  (The UNESCO Courier, 1951- 5)
The Bonds Uniting India and UNESCO
    by Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan 
President of the Executive board of UNESCO in 1949,  
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888 - 1975), was Indian Ambassador  
in Moscow when he wrote this article.  
He was President of India from 1962 to 1967.
