Kenya:  
burning sun and dusty soil
severe droughts have left kenya and the rest of east africa in short supply of water and food.  
for the purpose of this article, climate expert dr. dominic Walubengo took us on a road trip  
to the heart of maasai country to demonstrate how climate change is affecting the rural population of kenya.
By Søren Bjerregaard Jepsen, Danish journalist
e are halfway through the desert, near a town called Kajiado 
when the dry truth about climate change in Kenya kicks in 
once again. The journey tells a sad story about dead cattle, 
dry rivers and a way of life that is being destroyed by the CO2 
emissions the world is gathering to discuss at the COP15 
Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in December.
Dr. Dominic Walubengo works for the Kenyan organisation 
FAN, supported by the Danish NGO MS ActionAid Denmark. 
He advises the Kenyan government on climate and environ-
ment. He is going to Copenhagen with a message about a 
country and a continent in desperate need of new technolo-
gies and new ways of living if the rural populations are to 
survive the droughts that increasingly afflict the East African 
region. 
“Kenya and large areas of the rest of Africa need more than 
money. We need help to adjust to the changing climate. We 
have to find new ways of living for the pastoralists and we 
need new technologies,” says Dominic.
Kenya’s capital, Nairobi, is deservedly dubbed ‘the green 
city in the sun’. Driving south from the city, the landscape 
slowly shifts from green to brown to grey. Fifty kilometres on, 
dust from the plains dominates the horizon, fading slowly to 
blue as you gaze skyward.
As one of Kenya’s leading climate experts, Dominic is also 
a first-hand witness to climate change. He has proud Maa-
sai blood in his veins, inherited from his mother, though he 
has not lived the nomadic pastoralist Maasai life himself. He 
sadly contemplates the bloated carcasses of cattle by the 
roadside, dead from starvation and thirst. A couple of years 
ago, large healthy herds of cattle and goats roamed the fertile 
plains. 
How have the living conditions changed? “The pastoralist 
knows how to handle drought. It has hit Kenya many times 
before and it has always decreased the number of livestock. 
The difference is that it used to come every 10th year. Since 
1984, the droughts have become more and more frequent 
and now one takes over from the last. Some places have 
now had a drought for 3 ½ years. There are not enough good 
years in between for the pastoralists to build up their herds of 
goats and cattle,” Dominic says.  
As we drive though the parched countryside Dominic points 
out a dried-up river that used to supply water for people and 
livestock in the area. A year ago there was water, the area 
was green, and the women were growing maize and other 
vegetables on their plots of land. Now they survive on relief 
aid distributed by the government and NGOs.
Four million Kenyans rely on relief aid 
“They expect that 148,000 people in this area will soon be 
dependent on relief aid. The pastoralist tribes are nomads, so 
they used to walk many miles to find food for their cattle. Now 
they often walk in vain. They look for green grass hundreds 

Droughts afflict Africa.

of kilometres from their homes, but their cattle and goats 
are dying. I just heard about two Maasais in this area who 
committed suicide. They live and die with their livestock, and 
when there are no cattle left they do not know any alterna-
tives,” Dominic says.
Black, leafless trees and soil the colour of fired clay leaves 
an impression of a country not suitable for living. We pass 
an ostrich and enter a Maasai shamba – a small farm that 
several families use as their base. The proud smile on Tembe 
Resuka’s lips welcomes us.
“We need rain more than ever, and when we need it the 
most, it always comes. So now it has to come,” she says 
with no hesitation. Her husband is several hundred kilome-
tres away with the family’s three remaining cows. A year ago, 
they had 20 head of cattle and 500 goats.
How bad is the situation? “In Kenya there are around four 
million people that need relief. Kenya used to be self-reliant 
in food production, but the output has dropped and noth-
ing changes. Soon three-quarters of Kenya will be relying on 
food from the rest of the world. The drought hits everybody 
living in the rural areas and everybody without a steady in-
come. The whole of East Africa is affected. Outside Kenya 
it is bad in the northern parts of Tanzania, North and Eastern 
Uganda, Somalia and Ethiopia,” Dominic says.
Copenhagen has to succeed
The road from Kajiado to Nairobi passes through the afflu-
ent suburb of Karen where many politicians, wealthy busi-
nessmen and expatriates reside. There are more Maasai 
herds here than in Kajiado, and cattle graze on grass along 
the roadside, sustained by the rain that fell here in early Oc-
tober. Some of the Kenyan leaders participating in COP15 
live in this green oasis.
“The politicians are demanding a lot of money in Copenha-
gen. However, that is not enough. If African countries just get 
money because the Western world feels guilty about CO2 
omissions, nothing will change. The money will be spent and 
lost in the political system,” Dominic says. 
Dominic has advised the Kenyan leaders before and his 
ideas formed the backbone of Kenya’s Forest Act of 2005 
that has involved local communities in the preservation of 
Kenya’s few remaining forests. When it comes to COP15 he 
hopes to make a contribution. And that the Western world 
will take the climate related problems in Africa seriously and 
help with knowledge and technology.
What should Kenya ask for? “I’m telling the politicians that 
we have to ask for help. It is necessary that we get new tech-
nologies like wind turbines, solar power and so on. Moreover, 
we need the necessary knowledge to keep them running. We 
need education for Kenyans and technical support from the 
Western world. I am proposing that this be our main mes-
sage at COP15,” he says.
As we drive in the lush, affluent suburbs of Nairobi the need 
for radical changes in the rural areas can be hard to envis-
age. However, the need is evident in other parts of Nairobi. 
The slums are growing every day and experts estimate that 
about half of the 4 million people living in the city are slum-
dwellers. 
What is the solution? “People are moving from the country- 
side to the slums, because there is nothing left for them in 
their rural homes. Many have given up farming and their cattle 
have died, so they move to the slums to look for jobs. It would 
be a much better solution if we can help them find other ways 
of living where they come from, such as refining their crops 
and other businesses that can lead to sustainable incomes. 
Much can be done in this area,” says Walubengo.
Kenya’s leading climate expert Dr. Dominic walubengo is advising  
the Kenyan government at the UN climate change conference  
in Copenhagen.
Effects of desertification in Kenya.
