evolution that western countries 
have gone through so that we can 
drink from a tap today. 
The idea behind the journey was 
also to translate the relationships 
between man and water into imag-
es. In the West we have lost sight of 
the importance of this vital resource. 
It’s there in abundance; even hot 
water comes out of a tap. And, 
worse still, we use drinking water 
to flush our toilets. Most people on 
the planet find this incomprehen-
sible. In China, for example, water 
is so precious they see the Yangtze 
as a source of nourishment, like a 
mother.
So there is a direct link between 
water and development?
g: Absolutely. Because of their geo-
graphical isolation, people living high 
up on the Tibetan plateau are, in a 
way, condemned to underdevelop-
ment. Of course, the new railway 
that opened in 2006 will help Tibet 
become less cut off, but, for the 
the Yangtze or a journeY 
through time
Why did you choose  
development as the theme  
of your ‘Yangtze Expedition’? 
geoffroy: Travelling down the 
Yangtze is like travelling through time. 
High up on the Tibetan plateau, there 
are still people who have to walk 
for three hours a day to fetch wa-
ter. It’s like the Stone Age. If you 
travel downstream for a while, it’s 
the industrial era, with big cities that 
are beginning to control the water. 
And, in Shanghai, at the mouth of 
the same river, there is round-the-
clock running water. It’s the modern 
world. 
We wanted our documentary to 
show the link between access to 
water and level of development. We 
very quickly realised that China was 
the ideal place for this, because 
of the extraordinary diversity in the 
ways water figures in the lives of its 
people. 
loïc: Through this expedition we 
were able to rediscover our own 
history. It was important to trace the 
(•••)
time being, there is nothing modern 
about life there. One Tibetan stu-
dent who went back to her home vil-
lage, Qmar He, in the holidays, told 
us she spent most of her free time 
fetching water. In the city, she uses 
this time for reading and leisure. 
A little further down river, we saw 
a water mill, which is already a sign 
of development. But it took a long 
time before this kind of technology, 
albeit simple, was available. An-
other 1000 km further down river, 
we came across the famous Three 
Gorges dam. It is also a water mill, 
but much bigger. It was completed 
in 2009 and is the end result of a 
gigantic construction project that 
lasted 15 years. Still further down, 
we came across a paradox that is 
characteristic of all developed soci-
eties: we want clean water to drink 
yet still want to be able to use it to 
dump all of our rubbish! We finally 
arrived in Shanghai, where we found 
ourselves in a society, which, long 
ago, realised that, if you want to 
Loïc and Geoffroy de La Tullaye’s documentary film, ‘Yangtze Expedition.  
An adventure by the La Tullaye brothers’, shows just how crucial access to water is for human life.  
Here, they answer questions put by Katerina Markelova (UNESCO Courier).
The Yangtze, near Yushu.


                                                 on the banks of asia’s longest river, the Yangtze, 
                  which winds some 6000 km across china, yaks and yurts cohabit with cars 
     and high-rise buildings. Source of life to six million chinese, it is undoubtedly 
          also a source of development - as long as the means are there to make use of it.


have drinking water, you have to 
treat your wastewater. 
As we travelled down the Yang-
tze, we witnessed a whole series 
of stages in human development, 
marked by access to water, master-
ing it, making it secure, and manag-
ing it over the long term.
You were able to see the 
world’s largest dam, the Three 
Gorges. It made navigation on 
the river possible, and there-
fore brought development. But 
it is also causing some serious 
environmental problems.
g: This dam has really turned the 
Yangtze into a growth highway, link-
ing the developed East with the un-
derdeveloped West. Since the river 
has been navigable, the port city of 
Chongqing, which is upstream of 
the dam, has been mushrooming: a 
thousand people settle there each 
day! It now has a population of over 
32 million. 
l: Having said that, most of its 
wastewater still goes directly into 
the Yangtze. This polluted water 
then reaches the dam, where it 
stagnates, loses all of its oxygen 
and undergoes eutrophisation. In 
some places on the river, the layer 
of algae is 30 cm thick. 
If the Yangtze dies, so will the 
600 million people who live in the 
river basin - 10% of the planet’s 
population. If the Chinese do not 
act quickly, they will turn the Three 
Gorges reservoir into an enormous 
cesspit, an open-air sewage dump. 
And everyone knows this. If noth-
ing is done, the treatment that the 
Chinese will have to apply to make 
the Yangtze water drinkable will be 
a lot more complicated than it is to-
day, and may even be impossible. In 
China, surface water is still the main 
source of drinking water, not un-
derground water, which is practi-
cally untapped. 
What about the Yangtze river’s 
biodiversity? 
g: In 2006 pollution, the dam, in-
creased river traffic, and extensive 
the Yangtze or a journeY through time

fishing led to the extinction of the 
Yangtze dolphin. The disappearance 
of this symbolic species caused 
quite a reaction, but there are still 
a great many other threatened spe-
cies that we don’t hear about. Like 
the Yangtze finless porpoise, which 
is also endemic to the river. 
The extinction of the dolphin is an 
alarm signal. Even if we talk about 
the overpopulation of the planet, we 
might wonder if the next mammal to 
become extinct won’t be man. Every 
year nearly three million people in 
developing countries die of water-
related illnesses. Every 17 seconds 
a child dies of diarrhoea. So we 
might say the process has already 
started … 
Having said this, the aim of our ex-
peditions was not to criticise, but to 
provide tools so that people can in-
terpret their environment a little bet-
ter, and do something to preserve it.
Shanghai docks (China).
Shanghai-bound boats waiting for lock entry,  
Three Gorges dam.

Daily life in Miao Ajigen village.
