A
Project tiger            
       by Rahul Singh
In 1989, Rahul Singh was editor-in-chief of The Sunday Observer, 
India’s largest Sunday newspaper, published in Bombay and Delhi. 
 tiger in its natural habitat is one of Nature’s most marvel-
lous and unforgettable sights. Around three metres long and 
weighing about 230 kilos, the adult animal with its beautifully 
coloured coat of golden-orange and black stripes is swift, 
ferocious and powerful, yet languid and graceful in its move-
ments. It is an unmatched hunting machine. No other animal 
arouses such fear, excitement and awe; no other animal is 
surrounded with such an air of mystery. 
The tiger, which is afraid of no wild creature, has one mor-
tal enemy – man, who can not only destroy this magnificent 
animal with guns, poison and traps but can also destroy its 
surroundings with axe and chain-saw. 
Half a century ago, there were at least 60,000 tigers in Asia. 
In Indonesia, the last known tiger was killed just before the 
Second World War and the Caspian tiger followed it into 
oblivion three decades later. (Attempts are now being made 
to re-introduce the tiger to these areas.)
India has become the tiger’s last major haunt in Asia, but 
here too the species has been devastated on a monumental 
scale. At the turn of the century there were 40,000 tigers in 
India. By 1972 there were just 2000 left. For the maharajahs 
of India, with their lavish privy purses, tiger shooting was a 
status symbol. One maharajah proudly claimed to have shot 
1150 tigers during his lifetime. Bags of 500 were quite com-
monplace. 
But even the abolition of the princely order did not improve 
matters. Poachers moved in for the valuable tiger skins, which 
two decades ago were worth $4000 each. Meanwhile, In-
dia’s population explosion from 450 million at independence 
in 1947 to over 800 million today meant that people moved 
inexorably into the tiger’s habitat. 
Forests, particularly in the Terai region bordering India and 
Nepal, were cut down to provide land for foodcrops. Its cover 
and that of its prey destroyed, the tiger disappeared from 
many parts of India where it had earlier flourished in large 
numbers. In other areas tigers retreated further and further 
into such forests as were left, often killing domestic cattle in 
their desperate hunger. By the time alarm bells started to ring 
in the late 1960s, the tiger was on the verge of extinction in 
India. 
The 1969 world congress of the International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), held 
in New Delhi, signalled an important turning point. The IUCN 
put the tiger on its list of endangered species and called for 
a ban on tiger hunting worldwide, to which India quickly re-
acted by forbidding tiger-shoots. On 1 April 1973, an am-
bitious ‘Project Tiger’ was officially launched by the Indian 
Government in Corbett National Part (Uttar Pradesh), named 
after the legendary British hunter-turned-conservationist, Jim 
Corbett. Eight tiger reserves were initially created as part of 
Project Tiger, to which the World Wildlife Fund donated $1 
million. 
According to Bittu Sehgal, the founder-editor of India’s 
leading wildlife magazine, Sanctuary, the idea behind Project 
Tiger is basically very simple. “Each reserve is demarcated 
into a core zone and a buffer zone. In the core, no human 
activity other than forest protection is allowed; here Nature 
is allowed to administer itself. In the buffer, human activity is 
Tiger cubs in Mysore.

A
minimized, restricted to the exploitation of ‘minor’ forest pro-
duce such as grass, fruit, seeds, honey and fallen wood. The 
logic is that the core area, left to its own devices, will quickly 
become super-productive and that this productivity will spill 
over to the buffer zone.”
The results of the new strategy were extremely encouraging. 
Slowly but surely, the tiger started to make a comeback in 
India. At Corbett Park, there were only 44 tigers left sixteen 
years ago; today there are nearly 100. At Ranthambhor, a 
forest once owned by the Maharajah of Jaipur and protected 
mainly for tiger hunting, the number of tigers remaining at the 
start of Project Tiger has increased from fourteen to forty. 
Thanks to Project Tiger, the tiger has even made a remark-
able recovery in the Sundarbans, the 10,000-square-kilome-
tre mangrove forest in India, where the Ganges, the Brah-
maputra and the Meghna flow into the Bay of Bengal. Here, 
in one of the world’s largest tracts of mangroves, an area 
where the ecosystem was seriously threatened, more and 
more woodcutters, fishermen and honey-gatherers were be-
ing attacked by tigers, who, in the process of evolution, have 
become excellent swimmers and whose diet now includes 
fish. 
In 1973 Project Tiger was launched over an area of 2500 
square kilometres of the Sundarbans. At first, the authorities 
tried to exclude people entirely from the core reserve, but this 
proved impractical, and fishermen and honey-gatherers con-
tinued to go there despite the risks. So, in 1981, a new strat-
egy was devised. Electrified human dummies were placed 
at selected points in order to condition the tigers to fear 
man. When the tigers attacked the dummies, they received a 
shock, powerful enough to cause them pain. 
The ploy seems to have worked. Since then, the number of 
people killed by the tigers has dropped considerably. At the 
same time, since the inner core has been protected, honey 
collection and fish harvesting have increased by 300 per 
cent in fifteen years. 
As Sehgal says, Project Tiger is concerned not only with 
saving the tiger, but with ecology, the environment, and “sav-
ing mankind itself”. Today, the number of tigers in India has 
risen to 4000 and, in the process, other creatures that were 
on the verge of extinction in India, such as the elephant, the 
stag, the one-horned rhino and the wild buffalo, have been 
given a new lease of life. 
Above all, the Indian public is now far more aware of how 
man’s future on this planet is closely linked with Nature. 
Deforestation has certainly threatened the tiger, but it has 
also been a cause of the floods that recently ravaged much 
of north and eastern India. The connection would not have 
been made 20 years ago, but it is being made now. That is a 
step in the right direction. 
 (The UNESCO Courier, 1989 - 2)

