                  Twenty-seven new sites have been inscribed, in 2008, 
                          on uNEScO’s World Heritage List. 
                While no changes were made to the List of Heritage in Danger, 
                   ‘reinforced monitoring’ was requested for four sites: Bordeaux, (france), 
         Timbuktu (Mali), Historic Sanctuary of Machu Picchu (Peru) and Samarkand (uzbekistan). 
A permanent challenge
tional Council on Monuments and 
Sites (ICOMOS) to evaluate the 
tower’s impact, and to postpone 
action until results of the analysis 
are available. 
Infrastructure projects like dams, 
canals, roads and bridges are often 
highlighted in the state of conserva-
tion reports on specific World Heri-
tage Sites. In the case of the Group 
of Monuments at Hampi, India, a 
proposed bridge that threatened 
the site’s values was re-routed away 
from the property, leading to the re-
moval of the site from the In Danger 
List in 2006. Another situation, yet 
to be resolved, involves a proposed 
bridge at the Dresden Elbe Val-
ley. In 2006, the Committee took 
the position that the bridge would 
“irreversibly damage the values and 
integrity of the property.” This year 
[2008], it regretted the construc-
tion of the bridge underway and 
urged the authorities to opt for a 
tunnel. If the bridge construction is 
not stopped and damage reversed, 
the Committee decided, the prop-
erty will be deleted from the World 
Heritage List in 2009*. 
The threat of uncontrolled tour-
ism is one that occurs frequently 
at World Heritage Sites. There are 
travel companies that create tour 
packages around UNESCO sites, 
using the label ‘UNESCO World 
Heritage Site’ as a tourism market-
ing brand. At Angkor in Cambodia, 
there are reportedly 5000 visitors a 
day. In the Galapagos Islands, tour-
ism has increased from 40,000 visi-
tors in 1991 to 120,000 in 2006. 
The problems related to tourism 
include threats to public security 
and the heritage resources as well 
he 1972 Convention concerning 
the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage is perhaps the 
most widely recognized and effec-
tive conservation instrument in the 
world. One of its main purposes is 
to ensure “the identification, protec-
tion, conservation, presentation and 
transmission to future generations 
of the cultural and natural heritage.” 
Inscription is thus not an end in it-
self, but only the beginning. 
The World Heritage Committee 
provides leadership in promoting 
systems to support the sustainabil-
ity of heritage sites. There are pro-
cesses to identify threats to World 
Heritage properties, including peri-
odic reporting, reactive monitoring 
and, in cases of severe threat, In 
Danger listing. 
Over the past biennium, the World 
Heritage Committee examined al-
most 300 State of Conservation 
reports, the highest number ever 
examined by the Committee. Nine 
properties were removed from the 
List of World Heritage in Danger, 
in recognition of the improvement 
in their state of conservation, while 
five additional sites were added. By 
flagging them on this special list, 
the Committee hopes to draw par-
ticular attention to their plight.
Tip of the iceberg
But the In Danger List is only the tip 
of the iceberg. Most of the World 
Heritage Sites face conservation 
problems such as construction of 
skyscrapers, bridges or oil pipe-
lines, uncontrolled tourism, poach-
ing and climate change. 
The first major case discussed by 
the Committee was the proposed 
Wien Mitte project in the Historic 
Centre of Vienna, which, in 2003, 
sparked an ongoing debate. The 
most recent example is the pro-
posed Gazprom Tower develop-
ment in St. Petersburg, by the ma-
jor Russian natural gas company. 
During its meeting in Quebec, the 
Committee asked Russia to invite 
an expert mission from the World 
Heritage Centre and the Interna-
Band-e Miza dam, in Khuzistan province (Iran). The ancient hydraulic system in Shustar is 
inscribed on the World Heritage list.

* In June 2009, the Dresden Elbe Valley was with-
drawn from the List of World Heritage Sites.  
The construction of the Waldschlösschen Bridge 
altered the cultural landscape and integrity  
of the site as defined by the List.
The UNESCO Courier - Special edition October 2009

as to the quality of the visitor experi-
ence. The World Heritage Commit-
tee works on developing principles 
for responsible tourism that apply 
to the stewards and custodians, to 
tour companies, to the people who 
write guidebooks as well as to tour-
ists. 
Over time, the Committee has 
dealt with cases of mining, logging, 
gas and oil extraction as well as the 
poaching of animals for commercial 
purposes. And the Committee can 
claim some spectacular successes, 
such as the re-routing of the mining 
road around Huascaran National 
Park (Peru) and the re-alignment of 
a proposed oil pipeline outside the 
watershed of Lake Baikal (Russia). A 
singular achievement for UNESCO 
is the 2003 undertaking by the In-
ternational Council on Mining and 
Metals not to explore or mine in 
World Heritage Sites, recognizing 
them as ‘no-go’ areas.
An important advance: 
reinforced monitoring 
mechanism
Among the less manageable threats 
are natural disasters, including ex-
treme weather events, fires and 
floods often related to the broader 
issue of climate change. In collabo-
ration with international institutions 
and committees, the World Heri-
tage Committee has developed 
its own policy framework and op-
erational plan for monitoring and 
addressing the impacts of climate 
change on World Heritage proper-
ties. (See Case Studies on Climate 
Change and World Heritage, a 
2007 UNESCO report) 
Another issue that is beyond the 
control of the Committee is the 
threat to sites from civil unrest and 
armed conflict. As an example, par-
ticular concern for the deteriorat-
ing condition of the properties in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC) led the Committee last year 
to decide on a comprehensive ap-
proach for all five In Danger sites. 
The Committee has also recently 
adopted a ‘reinforced monitoring 
mechanism’ for properties inscribed 
on the World Heritage List in Dan-
ger, applying it to the five sites in 
DRC, as well as Dresden and Jeru-
salem. This mechanism can be acti-
vated either by the World Heritage 
Committee or by the Director-Gen-
eral of UNESCO in specific and ex-
ceptional cases. At its 32nd session 
in Quebec, decisions were taken to 
apply it to Timbuktu (Mali), Machu 
Picchu (Peru), Samarkand (Uzbeki-
stan) and Bordeaux (France), which 
are not on the In Danger list. The 
case of the five DRC sites was 
again closely examined. 
For the first time in the history of 
the Convention, the World Heri-
tage Committee in 2007 decided, 
with deep regret, to remove a prop-
erty, the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary 
in Oman, from the World Heritage 
List. The Committee judged that the 
property had deteriorated to the ex-
tent that it had lost its Outstanding 
Universal Value. This dramatic mo-
ment of the Convention reminds us 
all that protection of World Heritage 
is a shared responsibility. It is the 
obligation of States Parties to pro-
tect the world cultural and natural 
heritage situated on their territory; 
it is the duty of the international 
community as a whole to assist and 
to cooperate with States Parties in 
this endeavour. 
At the 32nd session in Quebec, 
Canada made a special effort to 
engage young people in the work 
of the World Heritage Committee. 
The long-term conservation of our 
World Heritage Sites depends on 
the will of future generations to take 
over stewardship responsibilities. 
Engaging today’s youth will shape 
the decision-makers of tomorrow. 
Christina Cameron, 
University of Montreal, Chairperson 
of the 32nd World Heritage Committee 

Skulls of plains gorillas, killed by war and the bushmeat trade (DRC).
Hampi (India). General view.
