A  green canopy of lush tall forests 
covers the Nokrek Biosphere Re-
serve in the North eastern Indian 
state of Meghalaya. The highest 
peak in the Garo Hills, at an altitude 
of 1,418 metres above sea level, 
Nokrek features undisturbed natural 
ecosystems and stunning mountain 
landscapes. The area is home to 
wildlife, including elephants, tigers, 
leopards and hollock gibbons, and 
rare orchids, many of which have 
yet to be documented. Nokrek also 
houses a gene sanctuary to pre-
serve rare varieties of citrus plants 
including the Indian wild orange 
(citrus indica), which could serve 
as a genepool for commercially pro-
duced citrus. 
Off the beaten path, Nokrek 
gained international recognition in 
May. Along with two other Indian 
biosphere reserves -- Pachmarhi 
in the central Indian state of Mad-
hya Pradesh, and Similipal, in the 
eastern state of Orissa -- Nokrek 
is among the 22 new sites recently 
added by UNESCO to its World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves. 
Their inclusion raises the number 
of Indian sites on the World list to 
seven, from a total of 15 Biosphere 
Reserves across the subcontinent. 
The new status is expected to have 
a huge impact on the conservation 
and monitoring of these reserves to 
find the right balance between eco-
nomic and human development. 
The challenge for all three Indian 
Biosphere Reserves is to achieve 
a balance between human activity 
and environmental protection. This 
is precisely the main challenge of 
UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere 
(MAB) Programme. “Apart from be-
ing a huge accolade for the area, 
the inclusion of Nokrek on the 
World Network list will help local 
officials discover how people living 
in the area can improve their qual-
ity of life and enhance the superb 
natural environment,” said Vinod K. 
Nautiyal, principal chief conservator 
of forests, Meghalaya. 
The state forest chief points out 
that guidance from international ex-
perts would greatly benefit Nokrek. 
He hopes the new designation 
will contribute to the research and 
documentation of landscapes, 
ecosystems, species and genetic 
variations, besides complement-
ing conservation and sustainable 
development strategies already in 
place. 
The Botanical Survey of India 
has revealed that 10% of plants 
in Nokrek are rare or endangered. 
Scientists fear that increasing hu-
man intervention around the area 
designated as the gene sanctuary 
is affecting the habitat’s natural 
balance. Large-scale deforestation 
and shifting cultivation have led to 
soil erosion, and the selective cul-
tivation of commercially-profitable 
citrus varieties in areas close to the 
reserve also threatens genetic di-
versity. 
Spanning an area of 47.48 square 
kilometers, Nokrek’s core zone is 
an important source of many peren-
nial rivers and streams, including 
the Simsang, Ganol, Bugi, Dareng 
and Rongdik rivers. One of the big-
gest tourist attractions in the area 
is the Siju Cave, located on a cliff 
overhanging the right bank of the 
Simsang River. Locally known as 
Dobakhol or the cave of bats, the 
tIgers and Men
“Project Tiger” has resurrected the dwindling population of tigers in Similipal.
(•••)
    black tigers, four-horned antelope, giant squirrels, mugger crocodiles, deer, 
         rhesus macaques – this is just a sample of the fauna living in nokrek, 
   Pachmarhi and similipal. Managers of these three indian biospheres are counting 
    on international support to protect the traditional rights of forest dwellers 
              and at the same time preserve wildlife.

cave is the third- longest cave in 
India, and consists of innumerable 
internal chambers and labyrinths 
which have yet to be fully explored.
Pachmarhi, botanical 
and religious sanctuary
Located in the heart of India, the 
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve en-
compasses three wildlife parks 
- Bori, Satpura, and Pachmarhi. 
It also includes the Satpura Tiger 
Reserve at its core, and the pic-
turesque hill-station of Pachmarhi, 
established by the British as a re-
gional army headquarters. 
With cascading waterfalls, ravines 
and gorges sculpted into the red 
sandstone earth, and dense ev-
ergreen sal and teak forests inter-
spersed with wild bamboo groves, 
Pachmarhi is a veritable paradise 
for botanists and geologists. Pach-
marhi is also an archaeological 
treasure-house, with rock paintings 
in cave shelters, some of which are 
estimated to be 10,000 years old. 
Pachmarhi also has cultural and 
religious significance for Hindu 
pilgrims who throng here in large 
numbers every year to celebrate 
two important Hindu festivals, Maha 
Shivratri (in March) and Nagpanchmi 
(in July-August). 
Pachmarhi boasts seven distinct 
forest types, including tropical, moist 
and dry as well as sub-tropical hill 
forests. A monsoon climate, with 
three distinct seasons, ensures a 
rich and luxurious vegetation. Peren-
nial streams and dark shady gorges 
encourage the growth of moisture-
loving species such as ferns, orchids 
and rare herbs. As many as 71 spe-
cies of ferns and fern allies, and 1190 
species of angiosperms (flowering 
plants) have been documented. 
Pachmarhi’s dense forest vegeta-
tion provides an ideal habitat for wild 
animals, including panthers, wild 
boar, barking deer, rhesus macaques 
and crocodiles, besides tigers. The 
area is home to over 50 species of 
mammal, 254 species of birds, 30 
species of reptiles, and 50 species 
of butterflies. 
The reserve, with a total area of 
4926 square kilometres, comprises 
511 villages, with agriculture as the 
main source of income. Poaching, 
deforestation and man-animal con-
flicts remain the reserve’s greatest 
problems. 
“The international recognition that 
we have gained by being added to 
the World Network will provide tre-
mendous financial support, needed 
for the improvement of infrastructure,” 
Nayan Singh Dungriyal, Field Director 
of the Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve 
said. “This will allow us to discover 
new approaches to conservation 
and sustainable development.”
The tigers of Similipal
The Similipal Biosphere Reserve, 
once a royal hunting ground of 
the Maharaja of Mayurbhanj, com-
prises the Similipal Sanctuary, and 
the adjoining Nato and Satkoshia 
Reserve Forests, covering a total 
area of 5,500 square kilometres. 
Sustained protection measures 
and management initiatives under 
the Indian government’s “Project 
Tiger” programme have resurrected 
the dwindling population of tigers in 
the Similipal Tiger Reserve, which 
accounts for nearly half the tiger 
population in Orissa state, on In-
dia’s east coast. 
Named after the silk cotton trees 
that bloom here, Similipal is a living 
laboratory for environmental scien-
(•••)
tists. Its ecosystems include lush 
forests, grasslands and wetlands, 
which are inhabited by elephants, 
panthers, four-horned antelopes, 
giant squirrels and mugger croco-
diles, besides being the abode of 
tigers, including the rare black and 
melanistic tigers.It houses 94 spe-
cies of orchids and over 3000 spe-
cies of other plants. 
The tribal inhabitants, who account 
for 73 per cent of the total popula-
tion of about 450,000, depend on 
agriculture, hunting and collection of 
forest products for their livelihoods, 
but need additional sources of in-
come. With 75 tribal villages located 
inside the tiger reserve, and the human 
population and livestock living in close 
proximity with wildlife, it is little wonder 
that forest officials are constantly chal-
lenged by man-animal conflicts. 
“Our biggest challenge is to pro-
tect the traditional rights of the forest 
dwellers, while conserving wildlife,” 
said R. Nagaraja Reddy, Orissa’s 
Chief Conservator of Forests and Di-
rector of the Similipal Biosphere Re-
serve.” The inclusion of Similipal on the 
World Network will lead to meaningful 
exchanges of information, experience 
and personnel. It will also considerably 
help the research of ecosystems, as 
well as monitoring and training work.” 
Besides providing advice, Reddy 
hopes the new designation will “bring 
funding from UNESCO through seed 
funds which could initiate local efforts, 
help broker local projects, and estab-
lishing durable financial mechanisms.” 
For Belinda Wright, Executive Direc-
tor of the Wildlife Protection Society 
of India, “The benefits for the sites of 
joining the World Network are largely 
political. With world recognition, the 
state governments of Orissa and 
Madhya Pradesh will focus more at-
tention on the protection and manage-
ment of these two tiger reserves, and 
this in turn should help improve their 
conditions.” 
Shiraz Sidhva, 
Indian journalist, correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier
tIgers and Men
Pachmarhi is home to over 50 species  
of mammals, 254 species of birds, 30 species 
of reptiles, and 50 species of butterflies.
