«T the first written Chinese calendar”, 
highlights Zhao Gang. Luo Xiahong 
is equally well known for having cal-
culated the precise frequency of so-
lar and lunar eclipses over a period 
of 135 months and for also having 
perfected the spherical astrolabe, 
which during Chinese antiquity was 
the main tool for predicting the posi-
tions of the stars. 
Another famed calendar was reat-
ed by Guo Shoujing (1231-1316). 
Developed under the Yuan dynasty, 
the astronomer calculated that the 
Earth’s revolution around the Sun 
takes 365.2425 days. This extremely 
accurate calendar was created 300 
years before the Gregorian calendar 
which uses the same calculation and 
is universally accepted today. 
It is estimated that from the 24th 
century B.C an official at the court 
of emperor Yao was specifically in-
structed to observe the sky and as-
tronomical phenomenon as well as 
tell the time. But the most ancient 
a story as old as  
the world
he two Chinese characters for the 
word universe (宇宇) denote the union 
of time and space” explains Zhao 
Gang, deputy director of the Chi-
nese observatory. He continues “it is 
indeed difficult for man to conceive 
the infinity of space-time and, more-
over, it has not yet been scientifically 
proven.” 
“Our ancestors believed in the idea 
of harmony between man and the 
sky”, he says, explaining that before 
starting any important activity they 
would first consult the stars. “Live-
stock and agriculture were in effect 
the two pillars of Chinese society 
during Antiquity. That is why agri-
cultural calendars were a central 
concern for astronomers, along with 
manufacturing astronomical instru-
ments and the observation of astro-
nomical phenomenon.” 
“Even our lunar calendar used 
today is founded on the scientific 
method applied by Luo Xiahong 
(140-87 B.C), author of Tai Chu, 
written information comes from ruins 
of the Yin dynasty (during the 14th 
to 11th centuries B.C). From these 
sites inscriptions on tortoise shells 
and bones tell us about the Sun and 
Moon, planets, comets, stars and 
meteor showers. 
The most ancient astronomical 
book known today comes from the 
Era of Warring States. The work en-
titled “Gan Shi Catalogue of Stars” 
(5th-4th centuries B.C) lists no fewer 
than 800 stars, including 121 with 
exact known positions. 
A particularly interesting document 
from Chinese astronomical history is 
the “Map of Dunhuang”, which con-
tains over 1300 stars (see photo). 
Created in the 7th century on a roll 
of Chinese paper about 4 metres in 
length, it is considered one of the 
oldest celestial atlases in the world.
Uniting the heavens 
and the earth
“The Mayan civilisation spread 
over an enormous territory includ-
ing south-east Mexico and parts of 
Central America. Their year was or-
ganised according to rainy and dry 
seasons and therefore the calendar 
had fundamental importance for 
organising civil life, building monu-
ments and agriculture”, explains the 
Mexican astronomer Julieta Fierro 
Gossman, winner of the UNESCO 
Kalinga Prize for the Popularisation 
of Science (1995). 
Onstage with a suitcase full of 
masks, sticks and cards – props 
for her performance – the expert in 
Mayan astronomy used stories and 
images to illuminate this fascinating 
culture, and concluded by handing 
out paper butterflies. A regular figure 
on television and radio, as well as 
at universities and schools both in 
                                       the movements of the sun and the phases of the moon have synchronized 
                       human activities, particularly rituals and agriculture, for thousands of years. 
            at its inception, astronomy was primarily used to measure time. calendars have played 
  an essential role in people’s lives. we revisit the astronomy of ancient china, the mayans 
    and the medieval islamic world with the astronomers Zhao gang, Julieta fierro and george saliba.
Cuneiform tablet containing 
ancient observations of the planet 
Venus (7th century BC).

From interviews at the launch  
of the International Year  
of Astronomy at UNESCO  
(January 2009),  
by Weiny Cauhape,  
Lucía Iglesias Kuntz  
and Katerina Markelova.

Mexico and abroad, Fierro spreads 
the message that science can be 
brought to everyone, provided they 
lift their eyes to the sky. 
“The main Mayan buildings were built 
with a view to measure time” Fierro 
reflects, before highlighting the story 
of Chichen Itza (a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site). This site was de-
signed so that during the equinox the 
Sun cast a shadow onto the pyramid 
resembling a serpent descending 
the staircase – this symbolised Ku-
kulkán, god of resurrection and rein-
carnation, also known as “feathered 
serpent”. “This effect was achieved 
by first building small models of their 
monuments” allowing them to calcu-
late exactly how and where to build. 
“The sophisticated level of Mayan 
astronomy, which still astounds sci-
entists today, can also be seen in 
the codices, made from bark, and 
stele, engraved stone to stone, that 
survived the Spanish conquest. Yet, 
the different measuring devices they 
used weren’t as complicated as 
astrolabes - they used merely two 
sticks. One had to be horizontal and 
the other placed at the altitude of 
the celestial objects – this way they 
could draw the different paths of the 
Sun, Moon, Venus and Mars and 
know when special events such as 
eclipses would happen” Fierro ex-
plains. The design of the temple at 
Bonampak for example, shows that 
they observed the Milky Way, which 
they called “Wakah Chan” and is por-
trayed in the beautiful frescos within 
the temple. It is embodied as a deity 
in the form of a snake which accord-
ing to their beliefs united the heavens 
and the Earth. 
The Mayans used both the astro-
nomical calendar (or solar, 365 days), 
similar to that found in other cultures, 
and another religious calendar with a 
260 day year, reflecting the time taken 
to bear a child. These two calendars 
coincided every 52 solar years. This 
was marked by a grand ceremony in 
which every house fire was put out 
and then relit to signify renewal.
The missing link
Contrary to popular belief Islamic 
astronomy is not the docile pupil of 
Greek astronomy. While the heaven-
ly science may have been in slumber 
in Europe between Antiquity and the 
Renaissance, it had extraordinary 
momentum in the Islamic world dur-
ing the Middle Ages, reflects George 
Saliba, professor of Islamic and 
Arab science at Columbia University 
in New York (United States). This is 
particularly true of the Caliphate of 
Baghdad, who under the reign of al-
Mamun gathered the wise men from 
the empire and encouraged them to 
translate ancient Greek, Indian and 
Persian texts into Arabic. 
According to Saliba, simply being 
a good linguist wasn’t sufficient for 
being a good translator. You also 
had to be equipped with a strong 
scientific background. So much so 
that some translators even correct-
ed the masters - the great Ptolemy 
was refuted more than once. 
When, for example, in 829 al-
Hajjaj translated the celebrated 
Almageste, the “great book” of 
mathematics and astronomy, he 
took the opportunity to recalculate 
the duration of the lunar month and 
included the correct figure. Ptolemy 
had published an incorrect calcula-
tion, taken from the Babylonians, 
without having verified it. 
In 1375 Ibn Al-Shati also improved 
Ptolemy’s highly complex “Earth-
Moon-Sun” model. The model is 
based on Arab knowledge and is 
almost identical to that proposed by 
Copernicus in 1543, the difference 
being that the Earth and not the 
Sun was the centre of the universe. 
Saliba wonders whether Coperni-
cus’s model was not even directly 
inspired by the works of Ibn Al-Shati. 
Especially given that their diagrams 
both represent the three celestial 
a story as old as the world
A brass astrolabe (Ispahan, Iran, 1712).
bodies and use the same symbols 
in the same places, only with Arabic 
characters in one and Latin in the 
other. Could this be the missing link 
between the Ptolemaic system and 
Copernicus’s heliocentric sys-
tem? 
One thing is certain: thanks to 
their technology, Islamic astrono-
mers perfected observations of 
the sky and through their meticu-
lous calculations they fine tuned 
the mathematics of astronomy. 
We cannot deny, as Saliba states, 
that “they redefined nearly all the 
parameters at the foundation of 
Greek astronomy.”

China: The map of the heavens of Dunhuang  
is the most ancient map of the stars found to date.
