A “language nest” in which the Maori 
language is transmitted to children 
(New Zealand).



                                     australian linguist Christopher Moseley explains the crucial importance 
of preserving languages and presents the main innovations of the just-released third edition
        of the unesCo “atlas of the World’s languages in danger”.
eAch lAnguAge  
is A unique world 
of thought
Interview by Lucía Iglesias Kuntz (UNESCO). 
control those forces. It’s very diffi-
cult and complex, and it would be 
naïve and oversimplifying to say that 
the big ex-colonial languages, Eng-
lish or French or Spanish, are the 
killers, and all smaller languages are 
the victims. It is not like that; there 
is a subtle interplay of forces, and 
this Atlas will help ordinary people 
to understand those forces better. 
But to answer in one sentence: 
why do we have to care? Because 
each language is a uniquely struc-
tured world of thought, with its own 
associations, metaphors, ways of 
thinking, vocabulary, sound sys-
tem and grammar – all working 
together in a marvellous architec-
tural structure, which is so fragile 
that it could easily be lost forever.
Can you tell us a few projects 
or initiatives you know that 
have helped to safeguard  
a language?
Projects and initiatives exist at 
all levels – from local gras roots 
campaigns from the bottom up 
to get people to read in their 
own language and thus pass it 
on to younger generations, up 
to big state–supported plans. 
Why should we care  
about language preservation? 
We as human beings should care 
about this in the same way we should 
care about the loss of the world’s 
variety of plants and animals, its 
biodiversity. What is unique about 
present-day language revival move-
ments, which didn’t exist before, is 
that linguists are for the first time 
aware of just how many languages 
there are in the world, and are com-
ing to a better understanding of the 
forces that are attacking them and 
exterminating them, and of ways to (•••)
Christopher Mose-
ley, editor in chief of 
the UNESCO “Atlas 
of the World’s Lan-
guages in Danger”, 
at the launch on 
19 February at Paris 
headquarters.

In Australia, for instance, there are 
active and successful campaigns 
to revive the use of languages 
that were regarded as dead for 
generations, but turned out to be 
only ‘sleeping’. In New Zealand, 
the Maori language has been res-
cued from near oblivion through 
the scheme of ‘language nests’ 
– nurseries where the language 
is passed on to young children. 
But the biggest success stories 
are the ones that are operated with 
state support and infrastructure, 
such as the reclaiming of Welsh 
in Wales or Catalan in Catalonia 
– two regions of Europe that have 
seen success in our own lifetimes – 
or, of course, the revival of Hebrew 
as a national language in Israel. 
What is new in this edition  
of the Atlas? 
This third edition of the Atlas is 
new in at least three important ways. 
Firstly and most obviously, it is being 
published in two different formats: 
an on-line version as well as a print-
ed version. The on-line version is an 
important new development, and is 
based on Google Earth maps, with 
the location of each endangered 
language, no matter how small, pin-
pointed as exactly as possible on 
the maps, which can be filtered to 
any desired scale and level of detail. 
Secondly, for the first time we are 
giving a comprehensive coverage 
of the whole world. The previous 
two editions gave only a sample 
from some continents of the state 
of threatened languages, but this 
time we have been careful to cover 
every language, and, as before, to 
show the level of endangerment, 
from “Unsafe” down to “Moribund” 
with a system of colour coding. 
And thirdly, we are making the Atlas 
available in three languages: Eng-
lish, French and Spanish, with pos-
sibly more translations to come later.
You are the general editor of the 
Atlas. Can you explain how the 
work for this Atlas was done?
It was a worldwide collaborative ef-
fort by a team of linguists, all of them 
experts in the field of endangered 
languages and linguistics. As in the 
previous editions (published in 1996 
and 2001), we had Regional Edi-
tors in charge of collecting data for 
each continent, writing the regional 
essays for the Atlas, and entering 
the language points in the maps. 
For some areas, local knowledge 
of the situation came from special-
ists in several countries. Of course 
the contributors needed help and 
guidance from technical experts at 
the Section for Intangible Heritage 
of UNESCO as well. The Web 
Editor from UNESCO provided 
help and guidance for the editors 
at every step of the way while the 
on-line version was being created, 
because this was a pioneering ex-
periment for all of us; and mean-
while the commissioning editors 
and myself as general editor were 
overseeing the preparation of the 
texts. The whole project has been 
done to a tight schedule, in just 
under a year from start to finish.
eAch lAnguAge is A unique world of thought
(•••)
Amazonia (Brazil): indigenous languages are today threatened with extinction, although Tupi, 
for one, was spoken as much as the official Portuguese until the mid-18th century.
