Catherine Cesarsky at the press conference organized 
by UNESCO for the launch of the International Year of 
Astronomy, on 15 January 2009.

“This is the golden age 
of astronomy”
Catherine 
Cesarski  
four hundred years ago, galileo looked at the stars through  
a telescope for the first time. To celebrate this event, the 
united nations proclaimed 2009 the international  
year of astronomy (iya) and named unesCo its lead agency.  
in honour of the year, the Courier is publishing an interview  
with Catherine Cesarsky, emeritus research director  
at the french atomic energy Commission (Cea),  
researcher at the paris observatory, and president  
of the international astronomical union (iau) since 2006.
Interview by Pierre Gaillard (UNESCO).
focus
is around 13.6 billion years old. We 
are able to observe galaxies that are 
barely younger than the universe. 
What new advances does as-
tronomy hold for coming years? 
We are currently experiencing the 
first discoveries of galaxies that al-
ready existed very early on in the life 
of the universe. For the moment, we 
are discovering a few: the brightest. 
Later, with even more sensitive in-
struments, we will be able to under-
stand how they were created, if they 
resembled the galaxies as they are 
now. We will be able to study their 
properties, which for me is some-
thing very interesting. We are also 
in the middle of precisely working 
out cosmological parameters, those 
that govern the expansion of the uni-
verse, its creation at the time of the 
What is the purpose  
of astronomy? 
Astronomy is the science that al-
lows humanity to try to answer ques-
tions it has always asked. Where do 
we come from? Where are we go-
ing? Are we alone in the universe? 
Using scientific means, we try to 
answer these questions, to under-
stand how the universe works, how 
the universe came into being, along 
with its galaxies, stars and planets. 
To know if there are other planets 
in the universe and if they resemble 
ours. And, in a while, we will proba-
bly try to find out if they are inhabited 
by living beings, maybe even made 
of cells as we are.
How is astronomy faring today?
This the golden age of astronomy, 
thanks in large part to great advanc-
es in technology. Astronomy is a 
science that uses technology to the 
maximum and makes it advance as 
well, always going to the extremes 
of electronics, optics and mechan-
ics. 
Recent advances allow for meth-
ods of observation far superior to 
those we had in the past. For a long 
time, we studied only nearby galax-
ies that we call our near universe. 
Now we have much more sensitive 
telescopes and instruments, al-
lowing us to see sources that are 
weaker. Usually, these sources are 
weaker because they are simply far 
away. And when we observe a gal-
axy that is very far away, since light 
takes a very long time to reach us, 
we see the galaxy as it was when it 
emitted the light that we are receiv-
ing. Today, we think that the universe 

Big Bang. There as well, we have 
a lot of potential progress. Finally, 
there are extra-solar planets that we 
began to discover a bit more than 
ten years ago because of their in-
direct effects. Now we know a few 
hundred. We know better and bet-
ter how to find ones that resemble 
Earth, and soon we will study their 
characteristics.
Have all these developments 
changed the profession  
of the astronomer?
The day-to-day work of an astrono-
mer has nothing to do with what it 
used to be. We have essentially two 
types of observational astronomy: 
astronomy on the ground and in 
space. It takes a long time to de-
velop instruments for space, they 
must be perfect, we cannot afford to 
make any mistakes. Just proposing 
and carrying out an instrument proj-
ect takes 15 years. The instrument is 
then taken on board a satellite and, 
to explore the solar system, another 
eight to ten years may be required 
before the probe reaches its desti-
nation. It takes a lot of patience! 
And astronomers who carry out 
their observation on the ground use 
telescopes that no longer have 
anything to do with those of our 
predecessors. We now have tele-
scopes with diameters of eight to 
ten metres and we are studying 
new ones with diameters in the 
order of 30m, and even 40m and 
more. Astronomers are no longer 
sat in front of their telescope, in an 
ice-cold dome, like in the past: with 
one eye glued on the star to make 
sure it does not leave the field. 
They now work in front of comput-
ers and do everything through re-
mote control. 
We are no longer satisfied with 
just visible astronomy. Between 
the ground and space, we scru-
tinize all wavelengths, from radio 
waves to gamma rays, which give 
us a much more complete view. 
What will the International Year 
of Astronomy achieve? 
The International Year of Astronomy 
was invented by the International As-
tronomical Union and – fortunately 
– UNESCO joined us very quickly! 
Our goal is to share with the rest of 
the world the wonder we feel as as-
tronomers, faced with the mysteries 
of the universe. 
We want all countries in the world – 
many of which have already created 
programmes – to get involved. And 
we want the public, the widest pos-
sible public, to be able to take part. 
By the end of the year, we would like 
everyone on Earth to have spent at 
least a short while with their atten-
tion turned to the sky. Or at least to 
have read something on the most 
recent discoveries, or reflected on 
our position in the universe.
(•••)
Hubble space telescope photograph of a star 
in our galaxy.
