A
              for the first time, thanks to the General History of the Caribbean, 
                           populations united by their common culture but scattered around this region
               are given prominence in history, not as mere objects but as subjects 
                                  and actors of their own destiny.
sharEd dEstiny
Bridge to a common 
history
In choosing to organise the General 
History through the use of themes, 
the Drafting Committee avoided 
the history being written merely 
as a series of chapters containing 
summary accounts of the histories 
of individual islands. Such histories 
had been written from the 17th cen-
tury to the early 20th by the Creole 
elite. The histories written by the 
European and American academic 
historians had for their subjects war 
and trade in the islands and the 
mainland. 
The first changes came through the 
broadening of historiography in Eu-
ropean and American universities in 
the first half of the century. Change 
also came through the movement 
for political autonomy. Both factors 
led initially to changes of emphasis 
in the histories of individual islands, 
and later to the histories of topics 
which linked the islands, notably, 
the sugar industry, slavery, slave 
laws, and immigration, European 
and Asian. 
In the established universities of 
Cuba and Puerto Rico, and in the 
history of the Caribbean observed 
from inside the region, not from the 
ports and capitals of Europe – this 
was the unprecedented approach 
taken by the Drafting Committee on 
the General History of the Caribbe-
an in 1983 in Kingston (Jamaica). 
The team of 18 scholars, most of 
them from the Caribbean but also 
from Africa, the United States, Eu-
rope and India, set out to examine 
the past of Caribbean populations, 
scattered yet nonetheless linked 
by custom and culture, in order to 
present it in a unified historical nar-
rative. 
Groups and cultures hitherto ex-
cluded from the historical narra-
tives, or included as objects rather 
than as actors in making our history, 
would appear centre stage – much 
was at stake.
To write the history of the Caribbe-
an region from inside, we had first 
to define that region. We began 
with the sea from which the region 
got its name, and then considered 
the lands lapped by that sea and 
finally added all the people who 
had inhabited those lands from pre- 
history to the present day, who by 
their actions had connected the 
lands to the north, south, east and 
west of the sea. The General His-
tory therefore concerns the islands, 
but also the coasts on the Caribbe-
an Ocean in South America, from 
Colombia to Guyana, and in Central 
America - territories which thereby 
had similar cultural heritages and 
experience of polity, economy and 
society, though at different times.
Old map of the Antilles.

Toussaint Louverture, leader of the Haitian 
revolution (18th century).
Garifuna, to the Kalinago who live in 
Dominica and St.Vincent. 
To the North and the East of the 
Caribbean sea, these migrants 
from the middle and south of the 
mainland had, over several hundred 
years, made themselves into Carib-
bean people with a Caribbean cul-
ture. They survived long enough to 
interact with the European migrants 
to create the New Society, the title 
of our second volume. There, we 
look at this society between 1492 
and 1650, at the Caribbean envi-
ronment, at the effects on autoc-
thonous societies of European oc-
cupation, at the basis for the forced 
migration, settlement and enslave-
ment of African peoples, at the na-
ture of the wars for lands and trade 
among the Europeans. 
The third volume looks at The 
Slave Societies, at the human cost 
of enslavement, the various forms 
of resistance to slavery throughout 
the region with attention to the one 
which led to Haiti’s independence 
at the beginning of the 19th centu-
ry. It discusses the abolition of the 
British trade in enslaved Africans 
and the eventual Emancipation, the 
result of a combination of slave re-
bellions in the islands and the de-
termined campaign of the humani-
tarians and free traders in Europe. 
new ones such as the University 
of the West Indies, departments of 
Caribbean Studies were opened. 
Undergraduate courses were of-
fered in Caribbean literature, 
history, culture and society sup-
ported by research the better to 
understand the activities which had 
shaped the region, and to identify 
the main elements which constitute 
Caribbean culture. The scholars en-
gaged in these studies have come 
together either in the Association 
of Caribbean Historians or in the 
Caribbean Studies Association. By 
the 1980s therefore the founda-
tions for a thematic General History 
of the Caribbean had been laid. 
What does our History 
contain?
The main results of scholarship are 
reflected in the six volumes of our 
History. First come the autochtho-
nous people, migrants from the Ori-
noco who inhabited the islands for 
hundreds of years before the Euro-
pean migration. 
Situated at what had become the 
gateway to the New World, they 
were decimated in the north by 
enslavement, inhumane treatment 
and disease. In the east their tacti-
cal skills, employed both in war and 
in politics with the Europeans, en-
abled them to survive longer; nev-
ertheless their numbers dwindled, 
and in the eighteenth century those 
that continued to resist were trans-
ported to Belize. The communities 
they established exist to this day 
and now teach their native language, 
African slaves working on a sugar plantation. 

sation and mass communication on 
local cultures. 
The final volume is Methodology 
and Historiography, in which we 
make available to readers the his-
torical evidence and techniques 
used for writing this history. We 
conclude with the historiography of 
the particular territories, of history 
writing in all its branches, and close 
by tracing the changes in the inter-
pretation of the past. 
roy augier, 
historian of Saint Lucia, 
is the scientific director of the 
General History of the Caribbean
Volume four, The Long 19th Cen-
tury emphasizes themes rather than 
chronology. The disputes between 
the estate owners and the eman-
cipated field labourers created the 
opportunity for government spon-
sored and funded migration from 
Asia, predominantly Indian. The 
constraints of indenture and the 
indignities attendant on being es-
tate labourers affected the ways in 
which Creole societies developed 
in the twentieth century. The social 
and economic relations in societies 
once dependent on slavery and in-
denture have been characterized by 
ethnic and class conflict. However, 
by persistent resistance to these 
oppressive regimes, these societ-
ies have also endowed themselves 
with the dignity and self-confidence 
of free men. The latter part of the 
19th century and the first half of the 
20th have been marked by the im-
pulse towards autonomy, as well as 
by the expansion of American capi-
tal and influence and the diminution 
of that of Europe in the region. 
Volume five, The Caribbean in the 
20th Century, looks at decoloni-
zation and neo-colonization in the 
face of the prevalence and persis-
tence of the plantation, the ubiquity 
of underemployment, and the vul-
nerability of Caribbean economies. 
It explores the effects of moderni-
(•••)
