The Indian film industry was born and took root in and around 
Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, major port cities where there 
was a strong backdrop of intellectual and theatre activities. 
From the 1920’s on, enterprising film-makers in these regions 
made films in a variety of genres such a mythology, history, 
folklore and fantasy, whose popularity cut across social barri-
ers. These films were products of the studio system. The ma-
jor studios had distinct identities of their own. Three of them in 
particular left a mark on Indian cinema in the 1930s. 
New Theatres Limited, with its famous banner of a trum-
peting elephant, was the vision of Birendra Nath Sircar, a civil 
engineering graduate of London University, who gathered a 
group of talented men around him and raised Indian cinema 
from the status of a novel form of entertainment to that of an 
art. New Theatres was a nursery for a number of directors and 
actors who later became household names. 
As one cinema historian has written, “Sircar wanted not a 
production company, studio and cinema halls, but a system, 
The First Indian Studios 
                       by Romain Maitra
Romain Maitra 
is an Indian journalist and critic specializing in dance and the fine arts.  
He also writes scripts for documentary films.

DVD cover of Devdas, by Sanjay Leela Bhansali (2002).
The logo of New Theatres Limited.

a pervasive, self-supporting, efficiently managed, supremely 
equipped network of men and women and machines which 
would sell the celluloid dream like it had never been sold be-
fore in India, in markets determined by the caprice of public 
preference.” The artistes, who worked as salaried staff and 
not on contract, had to be at the studios whether or not they 
were working on a film; when not acting, an actor might be 
given riding or fencing lessons or assigned temporary techni-
cal duties. 
New Theatres’ first big success, Chandidas, was based on 
the life of a Hindu saint. With Devdas, adapted from a famous 
Bengali novel, it captured the huge all-India market. Most 
Indian films had hitherto been vehicles for song-and-dance 
sequences, but Devdas was a serious treatment of a power-
ful dramatic situation. A fire in the studios in 1940 and later 
a sharp financial decline brought about the demise of New 
Theatres in 1955. The impact of communalism in the 1940s 
and the advent of the star system also helped to seal its fate. 
art director. Another had worked as a mechanic, accountant, 
electrician and scene painter before becoming the sound re-
cordist. The most important director of Prabhat’s early films, 
V. Shantaran, started out as a sign-painter and doorman in 
a makeshift cinema. These barely educated men possessed 
indomitable will, energy and organizing ability. In 1933 they 
moved to a fine location on the outskirts of Pune, 100 miles 
south of Bombay, covering a wide expanse ranging from hilly 
tracks to marshland. The facilities at this great film production 
complex, which had no highbrow pretensions, ranged from 
a huge studio and art factories to accommodations for the 
staff and actors. 
The veteran actress, Durga Khote, recalled later, “At Prabhat 
we reported for work at 5:30 in the morning, and we knew 
that shooting would be definitely over by 4:30 in the after-
noon. There was no departure from this routine as shooting 
was done in sunlight, and no artificial lights or arc lights were 
used. We were called for work at 5:30 because it took two 
full hours for make-up with the hard grease of the old days. 
By 8 o’clock we were ready for takes, and by tea-time we 
used to pack up, as no more shooting was possible 
with the fading sunlight.”
Prabhat Studio made many good films, in-
cluding Amrit Manthan (‘Churning of Nec-
tar’), produced by V. Shantaram after his 
return from a study tour of German stu-
dios. Amrit Manthan was a milestone 
in film technique and evoked a wide-
ranging humanitarian appeal on the 
issue of animal sacrifice. Prabhat’s 
peak period lasted barely ten years 
since it could not cover a wider 
market due to its early regional lan-
guage films in Marathi.
In addition to these three studio 
units, an equally strong complex of 
studios arose in the mid-1930s in Ma-
dras, South India. Films in the South In-
dian languages enjoyed autonomy from the 
all-embracing Hindi film market. Modern The-
atres near Madras, founded by T. R. Sundaram in 
1936, had a staff of 250 and made an average of three 
films per year. 
(The UNESCO Courier, 1995-7/8)
The logo of Bombay Talkies Ltd.
The second important studio, Bombay Talkies, was found-
ed in 1934 by Human Rai and became the true precursor of 
the Indian commercial cinema. Its films captivated audiences 
with a blend of political and social comment, glamour, melo-
drama and melodious soundtracks. Achhut Kanya (1936) is 
the tragic tale of an Untouchable girl in love with a Brahmin 
youth, who ends by giving up her life on the altar 
of caste barriers and religious bigotry. Films 
such as Savitri (1937), a mythological 
tale from the Mahabharata, effec-
tively captured Hindu values and 
sentiments. 
Foreign technicians, mainly 
German and British, were em-
ployed at the Talkies, and a 
lot of modern equipment was 
used. A staff of more than 
400 Indians ate together 
in the company canteen, ir-
respective of the castes to 
which they belonged. Well-
known actors would sweep the 
floors if need be. Famous au-
thors conducted seminars for the 
staff, who were assigned a variety of 
duties to broaden their knowledge of 
the film medium. 
Prabhat Studio was launched by a group of 
men who had learned their trade as junior apprentices in 
a film company in Kolhapur. One member of the team had 
done odd jobs at the Bombay docks before becoming the 
The emblem of Prabhat Studio.
