O
For an ethical approach  
to climate change
n 30 October this year, the European 
Union Summit in Brussels was unable 
to reach a decision on who should pay 
for what to help developing countries 
cope with climate change. There is a 
similar risk that the UN Climate Change 
Conference (COP15) that kicks off in 
Copenhagen, on 7 December, will 
come to an a minima agreement that 
does nothing to guarantee future mas-
tery of greenhouse gas emissions.
Yet no-one, or hardly anyone de-
nies the urgency of taking measures 
that are both ambitious and mutually 
agreed upon. So it is difficult to un-
derstand why it is so hard to find the 
consensus to take action, whether it is 
making drastic cuts in greenhouse gas 
emissions or helping those who are 
most vulnerable to adapt to impending 
changes.
One significant reason is that the ethi-
cal terms of the international response 
to climate change have not clearly 
been laid down. Agreed, the scien-
tific and ethical issues are complex. 
And it is true that powerful interests 
are at stake. But, since the adoption 
of the Kyoto protocol in 1997, we 
have been searching for a way for 
all nations to share the costs of re-
ducing emissions and of adapting to 
their consequences. Without agree-
ment on the terms and modalities of 
what is equitable, no solution can be 
found.
Knowing, but doing nothing – this 
is the ethical knot at the heart of the 
matter. It is time that the international 
community gave itself the means to 
cut this knot.
In what ways, exactly, does climate 
change pose an ethical challenge? 
It seems to me essential to take ac-
alain Pompidou (France), Chairperson,  
Bureau of COMEST (The World Commission 
on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge  
and Technology).
count of at least four dimensions: cli-
mate change invokes responsibiities; 
it has to be based on scientific evi-
dence; it calls for international soli-
darity, and it implicates every one of 
us as individuals.
Climate change is more than just 
greenhouse gases. It also has a hu-
man – and tragic – face. In Papua 
New Guinea, the Carteret Islands are 
drowning, its population forced to live 
in exile and a whole culture destined 
to die out. Other islands will also soon 
be submerged, with millions of home-
less, condemned to seek shelter and 
asylum in an increasingly inhospitable 
world. Then there is the desertifica-
tion of Africa and the fifty million refu-
gees that it will create in the next ten 
years, according to some predictions. 
If the very scale of these figures makes 
In December 1997, some 160 nations met in Kyoto (Japan) to discuss the measures to be 
taken to cope with global warming. The Kyoto protocol is the first legally binding programme 
aimed at combating climate warming. It arose out of the Earth Summit (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 
1992) and entered into force in February 2005.
them seem abstract, let us remember 
the women of sub-Saharan Africa who 
have to walk several kilometres each 
day to fetch water. And the more devel-
oped countries are not immune either: 
Hurricane Katrina, by devastating New 
Orleans and its coastal region, created 
a population of climate refugees, within 
the USA itself.
Finding a way out
Faced with these ever increasing risks, 
it is our duty to ensure that we are in-
formed, at all levels, so that we can act 
more wisely, for the benefit of those who 
have the greatest need. This brings us 
squarely to the heart of ethics.
What is more, the victims’ faces only 
express part of the challenge. Human 
life is just one form of life on Earth, which 
also includes the animal and vegetable 
kingdoms. The melting glaciers of the 
Arctic endanger entire ecosystems. It 
is not only the polar bear that faces 
extinction, but an entire marine fauna, 
which now feeds in polluted waters. 
And our actions will also affect future 
generations, who have no say in the 
matter. Is our epitaph going to read: 
“It’s your problem, you sort it out”?
An ethical approach to climate 
change, then, presupposes listen-
ing to all voices, taking all interests 
into account and drafting an agree-
ment that is based on principles that 
everyone can endorse. We are far 
from this today.
So, how to get out of the impasse 
we are in?
UNESCO’s mandate is ethical in its 
very essence. And the Organization 
has taken a major step in this direc-
tion by initiating, at its General Con-
ference in October 2009, a process 
that could lead to a universal decla-
ration of ethical principles in relation 
to climate change. This presupposes 
an international consensus which 
may appear impossible. But, on other 
controversial issues, such as bioeth-
ics, UNESCO has demonstrated its 
ability to give birth to an agreement 
by consulting all parties.
Discussions between States, while 
essential, are not sufficient - the 
people have to be actively involved, 
too. And difficult subjects have to 
be tackled frankly, including the in-
herently ethical responsibilities that 
result from knowing what is hap-
pening and having the ability to act. 
Without a recognition of this ethical 
dimension of climate change, there is 
a danger that all the technical agree-
ments never implemented, all the 
endless political compromises, will 
just be foam on a wave that, gradually, 
will submerge us all.
EDITORIAL
By Alain Pompidou
