The Great Barrier Reef, off Australia’s north-east coast.  
The world’s largest coral complex is under threat of disappearing.



Because of these alarming trends, the 
World Summit on Sustainable Develop-
ment in 2002 decided to keep the oceans 
under permanent review via global and 
integrated assessments of the state of 
the seas. This is the most comprehensive 
initiative undertaken by the UN system 
yet to improve Ocean Governance. In 
2005 the UN General Assembly through 
resolution 60/30, requested UNESCO’s 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Com-
mission and the United Nations Environ-
ment Programme (UNEP) to take the 
lead in getting this process started. The 
report of three years of work is ready and 
has been distributed to the United Na-
tions Member States and the general 
public. Later this year, in the emblematic 
UN Headquarters building in New York, a 
Working Group of the whole composed 
by all members of the UN will consider 
this report and propose a course of ac-
tion to the 64th Session of the General 
Assembly. A positive endorsement will 
open the way for the first Global Integrat-
ed Assessment of the Ocean to be con-
ducted by the UN system for 2014-15, 
the two years when the Commission on 
Sustainable Development will conduct 
a review of oceans and coastal issues. 
Given the high stakes, failure to do so is 
not an acceptable option. 
Patricio Bernal, 
Executive Secretary of the 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission (IOC), UNESCO.
W
hen the ocean makes the 
headlines, the news usu-
ally concerns a threat to 
biodiversity, a crisis in the 
fishing industry or an oil-
spill accident. These are important is-
sues, but are only part of the much bigger 
story that needs telling. 
As our understanding of the climate 
system improves, we realize the com-
plex yet essential role of the ocean plays 
in its regulation. Because of its capacity 
to store heat, the ocean is not only the 
engine of weather but also the memory 
of climate. Life on earth originated in the 
margins of the primordial ocean and for 
millions of years evolved in this aquatic 
milieu. The ocean is the ultimate global 
commons providing essential ecological 
services that make life possible on our 
planet. Humankind has strong funda-
mental reasons to revere the ocean, as 
ancient civilizations intuitively did. 
But our everyday behavior falls far short 
from this serene ideal. As the current 
piracy crisis has revealed - and despite 
the 1982 United Nations Convention of 
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) - there 
are many gaps in the governance in this 
unique international space. UNCLOS 
provides an integrated legal framework 
on which to build sound and effective 
regulations to the different uses of the 
ocean, which have been implemented 
by the UN specialized agencies and 
programs over the last 30 years. Nev-
ertheless, severe limitations exist for 
monitoring and enforcing these regula-
tions. National and international institu-
tions are fundamentally weak. They are 
usually compartmentalized on a sector 
by sector division of duties and respon-
sibilities, leaving little room for integrated 
policy-making addressing issues that cut 
across several domains. 
Thus, despite progress, many major 
challenges remain to be addressed. Reg-
ulation of High Seas or trans-zonal fisher-
ies is one of them. There is also increas-
ing concern that many fisheries practices 
are unsustainable and that global fisher-
ies generally are facing a major crisis.
Major challenges
Unsustainable uses are posing a dan-
ger to many special habitats as well, es-
pecially in the coastal environment and 
including mangroves, estuaries, coral-
reefs and underwater mountains, which 
are hot-spots of marine biodiversity. The 
illegal traffic of people, arms and drugs 
via the High Seas is increasing. 
Absorbing millions of tons of CO2 every 
year - one third of total annual emissions 
- the ocean has already spared us from 
catastrophic climate change. But in doing 
so, its own intrinsic balances are being 
altered: it is becoming more acidic and 
has taken the largest fraction of the addi-
tional heat generated by climate change, 
something that might eventually alter the 
normal patterns of ocean circulation that 
are so essential for keeping CO2 out of 
contact from the atmosphere. 
Much more than 
“fish and ships” ©

the oceans are suffering. the main source of food 
for two billion people, a key element in climate  
control and a largely untapped reserve of vital  
resources, they deserve to be managed better. this 
is why the united nations has decided to celebrate 
the first ever world ocean Day on the 8th of June.
