What were the origins  
of the Shaolin temple  
and how did it develop? 
In the year 495, Emporer Xiao Wen 
of the Northern Wei dynasty built the 
Shaolin temple on Mount Song, in 
homage to the Indian monk, Ba Tuo 
After that, two other Indian monks, 
Ratnamati and Bodhiruci, arrived in 
Shaolin and founded centres there for 
the translation of Buddhist scriptures, 
placing the temple at the very centre 
of Chinese Buddhism at the time. 
Later, the Indian monk Bodhidharma 
settled there and, claiming to “trace 
his lineage back to the Buddha him-
self,” placed the following thought at 
the very core of his teaching: “Chan 
goes straight to the heart of the mat-
ter; know thy true nature and become 
a Buddha”. He founded the Chan 
school, in the temple itself. It is a 
school of Buddhism that adapted to 
the Chinese way of thinking, as Bud-
dhism spread. [It became known as 
Zen in Japan. Ed]. 
Today, Shaolin has become the sym-
bol not just of Chinese Buddhism, but 
also of traditional Chinese culture.
What is the origin of Kung Fu 
and what is its relationship  
to Buddhism?
As an Imperial temple, Shaolin pos-
sessed considerable wealth. But, dur-
ing the final years of the Sui dynasty 
(581-681), the country suffered con-
siderably from successive wars. So, 
some of the monks learned to practice 
martial arts to defend the Temple and 
its treasures. 
Shaolin Kung Fu is nothing other 
than the path that the Shaolin monks 
followed to attain wisdom and a deep 
understanding of the Buddhist way of 
life, or “ch’an”. It is a means to meditate 
on ch’an, by practising martial arts and 
letting the ch’an serve as a guide.
“Shaolin Temple” schools and as-
sociations seem to be opening up 
everywhere in the world. What can 
be done to protect the secular values 
of Shaolin Kung Fu in the face of this 
phenomenon?
It is true that there are many estab-
lishments that teach Shaolin martial 
arts across the world. Some have 
been set up by the Mount Song Shao-
lin Temple, while others have received 
our authorisation after passing an ex-
amination. But most of these “Shaolin 
Martial Arts Centres” have just sprung 
up on their own. 
As I have not visited most of these 
establishments, I cannot pass judge-
ment on them. But one thing is cer-
tain: we are opposed to any abuse 
of the name of our temple that might 
undermine its traditions. 
We work tirelessly to protect the cul-
tural heritage of Shaolin. We have set 
up a special organization to regulate 
the use of the name “Shaolin Temple” 
and have applied to UNESCO for in-
clusion on its intangible heritage list. 
Inclusion would enable us to take le-
gal action, to collect and archive docu-
ments, and therefore to help guarantee 
the living transmission of this secular 
art. The rules of transmission of the 
knowledge and practices of Kung Fu 
from one generation to another have 
been strictly controlled since the 13th 
century. They were laid down by Ab-
bot Fu Yu. Since then, some 70 gen-
erations of masters have been trained 
at Shaolin.
As part of the UNESCO International Festival of Cultural Diversity  
held in May this year, a delegation of monks from the temple  
of Shaolin (which means ‘young wood’) came to Paris to promote  
the cultural and spiritual values of Kung Fu. One of them,  
Abbot Shi Yongxin, explained to our colleague Weiny Cauhape,  
how the Shaolin temple is the product of cultural exchanges  
and why it is important to preserve the activities  
that have made it a sanctuary for the Chinese soul.
  the celebrated martial art, Kung fu, was created fifteen centuries ago in china. 
       we owe its origin to a Buddhist monk from india. from there, it spread to Korea, vietnam, 
   the Philippines, Malaysia and Japan… to become, since the 1950s, a trend that has continued 
 to fuel the dreams of teenagers around the world. But in this process of globalization, 
            its intrinsic values are not always respected.
The warrior monks  
of The young wood

Shaolin kung fu is both a martial art and a spiritual quest.
