Thailand: Baan Khem village was the most severely affected by the tsunami of December 2004.

Building an effective and just climate agreement
as industrialized countries are responsible for 70% of the tons of carbon dioxide  
emitted into the atmosphere since the start of the industrial revolution, they have incurred a debt  
that must be repaid, according to indian environmentalist sunita narain.  
this would help emerging countries to develop without harm to the environment.
he world has still not learnt the first lesson of climate change 
– to share atmospheric space so growth can be shared equal-
ly. But this will require political sagacity, leadership and cour-
age. Global warming is possibly the biggest and most difficult 
economic and political issue the world has ever needed to con-
front. The question is if the rich world, responsible for the stock 
of emissions already in the common atmosphere, will find the 
resources to pay the victims of its economic excesses? Will it 
find the resources to pay for the much-needed transition to low 
carbon economies? The issues are clear. But the answers are 
lost in prevarication and pretence.
The reason is simple: climate change is related to economic 
growth. It is, as is famously said, the ‘market’s biggest failure’. In 
spite of years of protracted negotiations and targets set under 
the Kyoto Protocol (opened for signature on 16 March 1998, it 
entered into force in February 2005) no country has been able 
to de-link economic growth from the growth of emissions. No 
country has shown how to build a low carbon economy, as yet.
The inconvenient truth is not that climate change is real, but 
that confronting climate change is about sharing that growth 
between nations and people. The rich must reduce so that the 
poor can grow. This was the basis of the climate agreement the 
world signed in Rio (at the first Earth Summit in 1992). This was 
the basis of the Kyoto Protocol, which committed the industrial-
ized world to reduce its emissions by roughly 6 per cent over 
1990 levels by 2008-2012. But the world has never been seri-
ous about this agreement.  
The facts are clear. Between 1990 and 2006, carbon dioxide 
emissions of the industrialized rich countries have increased by 
14.5 percent. Furthermore, emissions from the growth-related 
energy sector have increased by 15 percent. This is unaccept-
able. 
This is when we know that climate change is about historical 
emissions, as a ton of carbon dioxide emitted a century ago is 
equal to a ton of carbon dioxide emitted today. According to 
estimates, industrialized countries are responsible for 7 out of 
every 10 tons of the carbon dioxide that has been emitted in 
the atmosphere from the start of the industrial revolution. This 
is the natural debt of nations, which like the financial debt must 
be repaid. But this is not all. Even in terms of current emis-
sions, the difference is clear. Between 1980 and 2005, the 
total emissions of the US were almost double that of China and 
more than seven times that of India. In per capita terms, such 
injustice is even more unacceptable, indeed immoral. 
By Sunita Narain

The way ahead
Firstly the rich world must reduce emissions drastically. Let 
there be no disagreements or excuses on this matter. There is 
a stock of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, built up over 
centuries in the process of creating nations’ wealth. This has 
already made climate unstable. Poorer nations will now add 
to this stock through their drive for economic growth. But that 
is not an excuse for the rich world not to take on tough and 
deep binding emission reduction targets. The principle has to 
be they must reduce so that we can grow. 
The second part of this agreement is that poor and emerg-
ing rich countries need to grow. Their engagement will not be 
legally binding but based on national targets and programs. The 
question is to find low-carbon growth strategies for emerging 
countries, without compromising their right to develop. 
This can be done. It is clear that countries like India and China 
provide the world the opportunity to ‘avoid’ additional emis-
sions. The reason is that they are still in the process of building 
energy, transport or industrial infrastructure. They can make in-
vestments in leapfrog technologies to avoid pollution. In other 
words, build our cities on public transport; our energy security 
on local and distributed systems – from biofuels to renew-
able; our industries using the most energy - and so pollution - 
efficient technologies. 
These countries also know it is not in their interest to first 
pollute, then to clean up; or first to be inefficient, then save en-
ergy. But technologies that exist are costly. It is not as if China 
and India are bent on first investing in dirty and fuel-inefficient 
technologies. They invest in these, as the now rich world has 
done: first add to emissions; make money; then invest in ef-
ficiency. The agreement must recognize this fact and provide 
technology and funds to make the transition in the world. It is 
this that is most critical. 
A quota system
The world must seriously consider the concept of equal per 
capita emission entitlements so that the rich reduce and the 
poor do not go beyond their climate quota. 
This allocation of the earth’s global sinks to each nation, 
based on its population, will create a system of per capita 
emission entitlements, which taken together are the ‘permis-
sible’ level of emission of each country. This would create the 
framework for trading between nations, as the country that 
exceeded its annual quota of carbon dioxide could trade with 
those countries with ‘permissible’ emissions. This would cre-
ate the financial incentives for countries to keep their emis-
sions as low as possible and to invest in zero-carbon trajec-
tories.  
Kaza, Spiti valley (India).

As much as the world needs to design a system of equity 
between nations, nations of the world need to design a sys-
tem of equity within the nation. For instance, it is not the rich 
in India who emit less than their share of the global quota. It is 
the poor in India, who do not have access to energy who pro-
vide us the breathing space. India, for instance, had per capita 
carbon emissions of 1.5 tons per year in 2005.  Yet this figure 
hides huge disparities. The urban-industrial sector is energy-
intensive and wasteful, while the rural subsistence sector is 
energy-poor and frugal. Currently it is estimated that only 31 
percent of rural households use electricity. Connecting all of 
India’s villages to grid-based electricity will be expensive and 
difficult. It is here that the option of leapfrogging to off-grid solu-
tions based on renewable energy technologies becomes most 
economically viable. If India’s entitlements were assigned on 
an equal per capita basis, so that the country’s richer citizens 
must pay the poor for excess energy use, this would provide 
both the resources and the incentives for current low energy 
users to adopt zero-emission technologies. In this way, too, a 
rights-based framework would stimulate powerful demand for 
investments in new renewable energy technologies. 
This rights based agenda is critical in the resolution of the 
climate change challenge. The fact is that climate change 
teaches us more than anything else that the world is one; if the 
rich world pumped in excessive quantities of carbon dioxide 
yesterday, the emerging rich world will do it today. It also tells 
that the only way to build controls would be to ensure that 
there is fairness and equity in the agreement, so that this big-
gest cooperative enterprise is possible. 
calculations of national co2 emissions conceal wide disparities.  
energy consumption by the rich is out of all proportion to that of the poor. here, a well is being built in india, in 1984.

Sunita narain is an Indian environmentalist and political activist.  
She is director of the India-based Centre for Science and Environment and 
of the Society for Environmental Communications. She is also publisher  
of the magazine Down To Earth.
