Inside a green marquee, eight year-
old Juan throws a dice in a game 
of snakes and ladders painted on 
a wooden board. He throws a four. 
He moves his counter forward and 
lands on a square marked “defor-
estation”. He is penalized and told 
to “go back three squares”. On 
his next turn he lands on a square 
showing a river basin. He is asked 
what can be done to preserve a 
water source. “Plant more trees!” 
he replies. He is rewarded, and can 
move forward five squares. 
We are in the Amazonian village 
of Rurrenabaque, inside a military 
enclosure, not far from the Ma-
didi conservation area. A crowd of 
children, most of them between 6 
and 11 years old, jostles around 
the puppet shows, memory games 
and puzzles. The adults are more 
interested in the poster exhibits. 
That evening, there will be the first 
performance of a play written and 
performed by a group of young ac-
tors, inspired by suggestions made 
by the “Green Tent” teachers, trav-
elling throughout this tropical area 
of Bolivia. All the activities have a 
common theme - pollution and pro-
tection of the environment. 
The green canvas awning stretched 
over four plastic poles looks like a 
giant beer tent at a summer festival. 
Or a travelling circus, with fun activi-
ties based on environmental issues, 
rather than performing animals.
Home-made games
The travelling show uses interac-
tive teaching methods designed for 
learning about sustainable devel-
opment, in an attempt to make up 
for the absence of environmental 
issues in the Bolivian school cur-
riculum. The approach works well 
in this country, steeped in oral cul-
ture. Since the project first started 
in 2000, the twenty Green Tents 
have toured some 100 indigenous 
communities. They travel from vil-
                                    Despite bolivia’s extraordinary biodiversity, it has one of the highest rates 
         of deforestation in the world. meanwhile, massive migration towards the fertile lowlands 
                 is hampering sustainable development. conservation International is using games 
                         to raise public awareness.
lage to village, at the request of lo-
cal people, staying for four to five 
days at a time. 
Set up and administered by the 
international environmental organi-
zation Conservation International, 
together with the Bolivian con-
servation association Trópico, the 
Green Tents project is run by a 
group of about fifteen agronomists, 
biologists, foresters, teachers and 
communicators, most of them vol-
unteers. The project’s US$ 30,000 
annual budget comes from the Unit-
ed States Agency for International 
Development (USAID) and the Bo-
livian National Service for Protected 
Parks (SERNAP). 
Eduardo Forno, Director of Con-
servation International’s Bolivia of-
fice and initiator of the Green Tents, 
is keen to point out that “the teach-
ing materials are not dreamed up 
in offices in faraway cities, but by 
pupils, teachers and foresters from 
the region. They are the ones who 
(•••)
inside  
the green tents
“Don’t shoot !”, says the puppet.

few means to maintain the services 
provided by healthy ecosystems. “It 
is fundamental for the preservation 
of nature and to keep Bolivia green,” 
he says. 
Activities inside the Rurrenabaque 
Green Tent show clearly that edu-
cation for sustainable development 
can be fun, no matter how serious 
the challenges for the future of hu-
manity. 
Niels Boel, 
danish journalist
decide which myths, stories and 
pictures they will use. Descriptions 
of the games are then sent into 
town, where they are manufactured 
by carpenters and artists, and dis-
patched to the schools. Specialists 
are on hand to make sure the con-
tent is accurate.”
Green tents  
for a green country 
The Madidi Park conservation area 
lies in a corridor linking the Cordil-
lera de Vilcabamba mountain range 
in Peru to the Amboró National Park, 
near Santa Cruz (Bolivia). This corri-
dor is thought to harbour the richest 
biodiversity in South America. But 
thousands of people are coming 
to live here, fleeing the fragmenta-
tion and arid conditions of the high 
plateaux of the Andes and looking 
for other ways to survive. This con-
tinual influx is causing considerable 
environmental damage - every year, 
some 300,000 hectares of forest 
are destroyed in Bolivia, according 
to the Environment Ministry. 
“Bolivia is landlocked, so the econ-
omy is turned towards the tropical 
interior, rather than the coast,” ex-
plains Eduardo Forno. “This is the 
major conservation challenge here. 
The people of the fertile lowlands 
know and respect the extraordinary 
biodiversity of their region, which is 
not necessarily the case for those 
from the high plateaux. This is why 
we are mainly targeting this group, 
as well as young people. There is 
a preconception that the new gen-
eration must be impregnated with 
the indigenous culture, as if it were 
passed down through their genes. 
But we tend to forget that the trans-
mission of culture can be affected 
by market forces and modern liv-
ing.” 
The intense internal migration and 
Bolivia’s opening to international 
markets for timber, soya and the 
mining industry are changing and 
increasing the risks to the environ-
ment. “People can see that there 
are fewer and fewer fish, but don’t 
inside the green tents
(•••)
perceive mining as a threat to the 
environment,” says Eduardo Forno. 
“But we know that any form of pol-
lution higher up the valley is even-
tually going to spread downwards 
and that mercury pollution sooner 
or later kills off the fish. The Green 
Tents project is raising issues like 
this and encouraging people to 
think about the environment, be-
yond the immediate situation.” 
According to Eduardo Forno, en-
vironmental education is one of the 
A green tent in the Rurrenabaque military enclosure, near Madidi park.

Group of children writing a play with an environmental theme.
