5000 Years of Indian Culture
          by Vishwanath S. Naravane
he development of Indian culture can be compared to 
the progress of a river from its Himalayan home, through 
forests and wastelands, orchards and farms, villages and 
cities. The river assimilates the waters or many tributaries, 
its environment changes, yet it remains the same. Indian 
culture shows a similar combination of unity and diversity, 
continuity and change. In the course of her long history, 
India has witnessed many changes, made many adjust-
ments, and assimilated elements from many sources, with-
out breaking the continuity. 
India is a land of varied landscapes and climates, of many 
races, religions, languages and cultures. But they all have 
an unmistakably Indian flavour. The source of this unity is 
elusive. It can be felt, but it defies analysis. In his famous 
book, Discovery of India, Jawaharlal Nehru gave a sensitive 
and fascinating account of his search for the unity at the 
root of India’s amazing diversity. 
The Indus Valley civilization (3000-1800 BC) shows an-
ticipations of ideas and art forms later regarded as typically 
Indian. This is clear from the artefacts yielded during exca-
vations at Harappa and Mohenjodaro. A statue of a man 
in meditation suggests the practise of Yoga. The smooth 
surfaces of a male torso in stone suggests, by its absence 
of muscular tension, the classical Indian concept of inward 
energy. A deity depicted on a clay seal is very similar to 
some later images of Shiva. And a little copper dancing-girl 
wears bangles of a kind that can be purchased today at a 
wayside bazaar in India. Recent research has shows that 
the influence of this culture extended to distant regions of 
northern and western India, and that the Indus Valley people 
had close contacts with the Dravidian civilization, which 
flourished in southern India long before the coming of the 
Aryans. 
Some time between 2000 and 1600 BC, a branch of the 
vast Aryan family, usually referred to as Indo-Aryans, migrat-
ed to India. They brought with them the Sanskrit language, 
and a religion based on sacrificial ritual, honouring deities 
symbolizing elemental forces of Nature, such as Indra, god 
of rain and thunder, Agni (Fire) and Varuna, lord of the seas, 
rivers and seasons. Hymns addressed to these and other 
Vishwanath S. Naravane,  
former head of the Departments of Philosophy at the universities  
of Allahabad and Poona, is the author of a number of works  
on Indian cultural history and thought, including Modern Indian Thought, 
Dictionary of Indian Mythology, A Cultural History of Modern India.
Shore Temple at Mahabalipuram in 1963. © UNESCO/C. Hills

deities were collected in the 
four Vedas. The oldest of the Ve-
das is the Rigveda (1500-1200 
BC) in which there is a quest 
for the Supreme Reality underly-
ing all multiplicity. This trend was 
strengthened in the dialogues 
of the Upanishads (900-600 
BC). Vedic poetry is marked by 
lofty ideas, literary beauty and a 
movement from external ritual to 
inward experience. 
Two religions outside the Vedic 
tradition emerged in the sixth 
century BC. The Buddha’s per-
sonality, and his emphasis on 
love, compassion and harmony, 
profoundly influenced Indian 
thought and culture, though Bud-
dhism as an organized religion 
struck deeper roots outside 
India. Jainism, founded by Ma-
havira, stressed truth and non-
violence, and made significant 
contributions to Indian art and 
philosophy. 
In 326 BC, Alexander of Macedon crossed the Indus and 
won a decisive battle. Although he soon turned back, his 
invasion influenced Indian culture by initiating contacts with 
the Greco-Roman world. Six years later, Chandragupta 
Maurya tried to unite the scattered kingdoms and republics 
of India in a centralized empire, with the capital at Patali-
putra (modern Patna in Bihar). His grandson, Ashoka (who 
reigned from 273-237 BC), recoiling from the horrors of 
war, became an ardent Bud-
dhist. The message of com-
passion and gentleness was 
inscribed on rocks and highly 
polished stone columns. The 
capitals surmounting the 
columns are fine pieces of 
sculpture. 
Kings of the Shunga dynas-
ty (185-149 BC) were ortho-
dox Hindus, but there was a 
strong Buddhist revival under 
Kanishka, the Kushan king 
who ruled in north-western In-
dia (78-101 AD). The Gand-
hara style of Buddhist sculp-
ture, strongly influenced by 
Greco-Roman art, developed 
under the Kushans. Another 
centre of Buddhist art was Mathura (south of Delhi).
Pataliputra again became the centre of political and cul-
tural activity during the Gupta Empire (319-540 AD), which 
has been described as the golden age of ancient Indian cul-
ture. Some of the Gupta kings, such as Chandragupta and 
Skandagupta, were poets and musicians. Kalidasa, great-
est among Sanskrit poets and dramatists, lived during the 
reign of Chandragupta. The Buddha images of Sarnath, and 
the frescoes painted in the caves of Ajanta in western India, 
are among the artistic masterpieces of this age. The decline 
of the Gupta Empire was followed by political fragmenta-
tion. King Harsha of Kannauj tried 
to stem this process, but, after 
his death in 648 AD, indepen-
dent kingdoms arose in Kashmir, 
Bengal, Orissa and many other 
regions of southern as well as 
northern India. 
Culturally, this was a very rich 
period. The Cholas, Pallavas and 
Rashtrakutas of south India built 
the superb temples at Tanjore, 
Mamallapuram and Ellora. The 
Sun Temple of Konârak in Orissa 
and the Shiva Temple at Khajura-
ho in Central India were built in 
the eleventh century. In all these 
temples, sculpture is an integral 
part of the architecture. In litera-
ture, Sanskrit was gradually being 
replaced by regional languages 
such as Bengali, Marathi, Hindi 
and Punjabi. In the south, Tamil, 
Telugu and Kannada had devel-
oped their literary traditions. The 
Vedanta philosophies of Shanka-
ra (eighth century) and Ramanuja 
(twelfth century) exerted a deep influence. There was, how-
ever, a conservative trend in social and religious life. The 
caste system, originally based on differences of aptitude, 
became rigid and oppressive. 
The establishment of Muslim rule at the end of the twelfth 
century was a turning point in India’s cultural history. An 
initial period of conflict was inevitable because of the radi-
cal differences between Hinduism and Islam. But a process 
of accommodation soon 
started. Sufi mysticism, phil-
osophically close to Vedan-
ta, was one of the meeting 
points. Many Muslim kings, 
at Delhi and in regional king-
doms, were patrons of Indian 
literature and music, and 
participated in Hindu festi-
vals. After the foundation of 
the Mughal Empire (1526 
AD) the trend towards inte-
gration was strengthened. 
Under the wise and tolerant 
rule of Akbar (1556-1605) 
the foundation of a national 
culture was firmly laid. The 
Hindu and Muslim traditions, 
while retaining their distinct 
identities, influenced each other deeply. 
Islamic architecture in India was at first austere and simple. 
But the builders soon started adopting decorative elements, 
including the lotus motif, from Hindu temples. Conversely, 
many temples built in medieval India have Islamic features, 
such as the dome, the arch and screens carved of stone 
and marble. Indian architecture reached its apex during the 
reign of Shah Jahan (1627-1658), who built such master-
pieces as the Pearl Mosque at Agra and the Taj Mahal, ‘the 
dream in marble’. 
In painting, too, there was a blend of the two traditions. 
A cymbal player in the Sun Chariot Pagoda  
(Temple of Konârak in Orissa).

Sanchi stupa built by the Maurya Emperor Ashoka.

Inspired by Bihzad and other 
great Persian artists, painters 
at the Mughal court created a 
new style of miniature paint-
ing. Combining the technique 
and subtlety of this style with 
the religious and aesthetic 
spirit of India, painters of the 
Rajput School made their 
own distinctive contribution. 
One of the greatest genius-
es of medieval India was Amir 
Khusrau: poet, musician, and 
linguist. He invented several 
instruments played in clas-
sical Indian music. His po-
etical experiments led to the 
emergence of Urdu, one of 
the major Indian languages. The sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries were exceptionally rich in devotional poetry in re-
gional languages. Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, Tulsidas, 
whose Hindi version of the Ramayana epic is recited and 
read by millions even today, Kabir, whose poetry transcend-
ed all sectarian differences – these and other saint-poets 
preached a universal religion based on tolerance and love. 
The Mughal Empire declined rapidly during the first quar-
ter of the eighteenth century. Meanwhile, Europeans were 
making inroads into India: the Portuguese, the Dutch, the 
French, and finally the British who emerged victorious. By 
the end of the eighteenth century, British authority was firm-
ly established. The introduction of English education and 
the work of Christian missionaries had a deep impact on the 
cultural and religious life of India. Calcutta, the new capital, 
became the centre of Western thought, followed by Bombay 
and Madras. Some educated Indians, in their excessive zeal 
for European culture, turned away from their own heritage. 
But a reform movement, founded by Raja Ram Mohan Roy, 
ushered in a spiritual and cultural renaissance. The leaders 
of this movement, known as 
the Brahmo Samaj, stressed 
the deeper truths of Hindu 
and Muslim scriptures, while 
accepting progressive ele-
ments of Western thought. 
Another source of inspiration 
was Sri Ramakrishna (1836-
1886), who regarded differ-
ent religions as paths leading 
to the same goal, and his fa-
mous discipline, Swami Vive-
kananda (1863-1902), who 
is remembered as India’s 
first spiritual and cultural 
ambassador to Europe and 
America. 
Though politically subjugat-
ed, Indian culture retained its dynamism. In the latter half of 
the nineteenth century, novelists and dramatists took up po-
litical, historical and social themes. Ghalib, the great Urdu 
poet, and Bankim Chatterji, the Bengali novelist, made rich 
contributions to Indian literature. Outstanding musicians, 
many of whom were Muslims, kept alive the tradition of clas-
sical Indian music. The kathak school of dance was deve- 
loped at Lucknow and Jaipur. Later, there was a renaissance 
in Indian painting, initiated by Abanindranath Tagore and 
other artists of the Bengal School. Plays based on mytho-
logical as well as modern subjects were staged at Calcutta 
and Bombay. 
Meanwhile, under the leadership of the Indian National 
Congress (founded in 1885) the movement for indepen-
dence was gaining strength. The sense of patriotism thus 
aroused was reflected in the literature of the age. When 
Mahatma Gandhi returned to India, after his heroic struggle 
against racism in South Africa, a new chapter was opened 
in India’s life. 
The Mahatma touched every aspect of Indian life, though 
Group of monolithic temples at Mamallapuram, Tamil Nadu. They were hewn out of the rock in the 7th century A.D.

Finished in 1572 and attributed to Persian architects, Humayun’s Tomb  
is now one of the best-preserved Mughal monuments in Delhi.

his main concern was with social and political issues. Some 
of the greatest writers of that period – Bharati in Tamil, 
Premchand in Hindi, Sharat Chatterji in Bengali – expressed 
Gandhian ideals in their poems and novels. 
Indian culture in the twentieth century was dominated by 
the towering genius of Rabindranath Tagore, one of the 
greatest poet-philosophers in world history. Tagore left the 
stamp of his personality and work on every field of creativ-
ity: poetry, music, drama, novel and short story, even paint-
ing. He was the first non-Western writer to be awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Literature. He founded the international uni-
versity, Vishwa-Bharati, and anticipated many modern con-
Golden Temple and Guru Nanak tomb, Sikh inspired architecture (Amritsar).

Young Bengali girl, student of a dancing school  
in Calcutta, in 1955. 

cepts in education. Tagore influenced an entire generation 
of Indian writers and artists. Gandhi and Tagore are rightly 
regarded as the makers of modern India. 
On 15 August 1947, Indian became an independent nation. 
Thus, in Jawaharlal Nehru’s words, India had “kept her tryst 
with destiny” after a century of struggle. The partition of the 
country on the basis of religion, the bloodshed that followed, 
and then the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, were pain-
ful shocks. But the trauma was soon overcome and India 
began building her future as a sovereign country taking her 
rightful place in the community of nations. 
Since independence, India has made significant progress 
in many areas of culture. In almost all the fourteen major 
languages of India (fifteen including English), creative litera-
ture of the highest order has been produced. Satyajit Ray 
is recognized as one of the greatest film directors in the 
world. In classical music, Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan; 
in painting Jamini Ray and M.F. Hussain; in classical dance, 
Balasarasvati – these are only a few among the outstanding 
artists who have enriched Indian culture in recent decades. 
Selectivity, assimilation and adjustment have charac-
terized Indian culture throughout its long history. It has 
confronted and overcome many periods of crisis and 
uncertainty. Today there are new challenges, demanding 
new adjustments. Ours is the age of science and tech-
nology. How to preserve whatever is of enduring worth 
in the spiritual and aesthetic tradition that has stood the 
test of fifty centuries, and how to reinterpret that tradi-
tion in the contemporary context: that is the question 
which the thinkers, artists and writers of India have to 
deal with. Their ability to handle this task in a balanced 
and imaginative manner will determine the future course 
of Indian culture. 
