ting out, in several collections of regional and cultural 
histories, the essential creations of the human mind, 
regardless of their latitude and period.
By developing a more acute awareness of the partic-
ular cultural identities of each society, and seeing the 
emergence of new forms of independence, it became 
necessary, when writing their history, to reflect the point 
of view of the civilizations concerned. The History of 
Humanity, as well as the General History of Africa, the 
History of Civilizations of Central Asia, the General His-
tory of Latin America, the General History of the Carib-
bean  and that of the Different Aspects of Islamic Culture, 
are the fruit of this endeavour. A total of 51 published 
volumes, some in dozens of languages.
Is it overly idealistic to wish to fix on paper something 
that is endlessly being reborn? More of a challenge. 
Although all societies have a history, the conception of 
time varies from one culture to another, and, with it, the 
status accorded to memory. Also, while our geography 
no longer has virgin continents, the contributions of dif-
ferent peoples to the construction of mankind remains 
largely underestimated, even unknown – when they are 
not actively denied or reinterpreted to conform to the 
viewpoint of a dominating force. 
In order to refocus the historian’s eye and to give a 
voice to those who have not been heard, UNESCO 
as uneSCo began weaving the thousand  
and one ariadne’s threads of past and  
present, just after the Second World War,  
it embarked on an adventure of  
universal dimensions – writing a new  
history of humanity. But also of africa,  
latin america, Central asia, the Caribbean  
and islamic Culture. 
The “Nagasaki Angel” from the Urakami church destroyed  
by the atomic bomb explosion on 9 August 1945.

after the noise and furore of the Second World War and 
the nuclear hell of Hiroshima, mankind was confronted 
with a Shakespearian dilemma – to unite or to anni-
hilate? Convinced that “…ignorance of each other’s 
ways and lives has been a common cause, throughout 
the history of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust 
between the peoples of the world through which their 
differences have all too often broken into war,” as laid 
down in the preamble to UNESCO’s constitution, the 
founding fathers of the Organization embarked on a 
project for a new History of Humanity. This was to be a 
work of collective memory that would demonstrate the 
interdependence between peoples and cultures, while 
building bridges between history, culture and science. 
One of the missions of this audacious project was to 
forge an awareness of the unity of mankind in all its di-
versity, thus responding to the intuition of the Dutch his-
torian, Jean Huizinga, who, writing in the 1930’s, said: 
“Our civilization is the first whose past is that of the 
world; our history is the first to be universal.” 
Refocusing the historian’s eye 
This ambition of becoming familiar with time in order to 
overcome a tendency to leave things out, was, indeed, 
excessive, since it meant no more and no less than set-
Sir Julian Huxley, one of UNESCO’s founding 
fathers and first Director General.

Acropolis, symbol of democracy (Athens, Greece).



gave historians from all cultures and geographical ho-
rizons an opportunity to express themselves, abandon-
ing strictly national approaches and temporary fixes to 
preserve identities. 
“The public now has access to collections of history 
that rehabilitate the past of civilizations that had hith-
erto been ignored and that also take a fresh look at cul-
tures that have been obscured by prejudice and stereo-
types,” declared Koïchiro Matsuura, Director-General of 
UNESCO, as he promised to complete this immense 
endeavour, started in the 1950s.
Disarming history
By weaving the thousand and one Ariadne’s threads of 
memories of the past and of current events, UNESCO 
has embarked on an adventure of universal proportions. 
Here, the notion of time takes on its full meaning, since 
it enables us to apprehend the global evolution of soci-
eties, as cultures blossomed through exchanges, albeit 
marked by bloody violence, but also through the gene- 
rous acceptance of difference, leaving indelible traces.
As new forms of ignorance and intolerance emerge 
today, foisting hypotheses about the end of history and 
an isolationist quest to preserve identity, the principles 
of mutual respect, solidarity and dialogue between civili-
zations and cultures — which inspired the creation of the 
United Nations system — are as important as ever. 
The collections of history published by UNESCO bear 
witness to the common legacies and dreams of mankind 
and, given the wide dissemination of their message, may 
help to build a shared future that will capitalise on the 
possibilities for mutual understanding between cultures 
in this age of globalization.
Katérina stenou, 
Director of the Division of Cultural Policies 
and Intercultural Dialogue (UNESCO)
