tigers and Men                         
                       by Shiraz Sidhva, Indian journalist
green canopy of lush tall forests covers 
the Nokrek Biosphere Reserve in the 
North eastern Indian state of Megha-
laya. The highest peak in the Garo Hills, 
at an altitude of 1418 metres above sea 
level, Nokrek features undisturbed natu-
ral ecosystems and stunning mountain 
landscapes. The area is home to wildlife, 
including elephants, tigers, leopards, 
hollock gibbons and rare orchids, many 
of which have yet to be documented. 
Nokrek also houses a gene sanctuary to 
preserve rare varieties of citrus plants, 
including the Indian wild orange (Citrus 
indica), which could serve as a gene 
pool for commercially produced citrus. 
Nokrek, highest point in the Garo Hills, is distinguished by its stunning mountain landscapes.

Off the beaten path, Nokrek gained 
international recognition in May 2009. 
Along with two other Indian biosphere 
reserves – Pachmarhi in the central 
Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, and 
Similipal, in the eastern state of Orissa 
– Nokrek is among the 22 new sites re-
cently added by UNESCO to its World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves. Their 
inclusion raises the number of Indian 
sites on the World List to seven, from a 
total of 15 Biosphere Reserves across 
the subcontinent. 
The new status is expected to have 
a huge impact on the conservation and 
monitoring of these reserves to find the 
right balance between economic and 
human development. 
The challenge for all three Indian Bio-
sphere Reserves is to achieve a bal-
ance between human activity and envi-
ronmental protection. This is precisely 
the main challenge of UNESCO’s Man 
and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme. 
“Apart from being a huge accolade for 
the area,” said Vinod K. Nautiyal, principal 
chief conservator of forests, Meghalaya, 
“the inclusion of Nokrek on the World 
Network list will help local officials dis-

cover how people living in the area can 
improve their quality of life and enhance 
the superb natural environment.” 
The state forest chief points out that 
guidance from international experts 
would greatly benefit Nokrek. He hopes 
the new designation will contribute to 
the research and documentation of 
landscapes, ecosystems, species and 
genetic variations, besides complement-
ing conservation and sustainable devel-
opment strategies already in place. 
The Botanical Survey of India has re-
vealed that 10% of plants in Nokrek are 
rare or endangered. Scientists fear that 
increasing human intervention around 
the area designated as the gene sanc-
tuary is affecting the habitat’s natural 
balance. Large-scale deforestation and 
shifting cultivation have led to soil ero-
sion, and the selective cultivation of 
commercially profitable citrus varieties in 
areas close to the reserve also threatens 
genetic diversity. 
Spanning an area of 47.48 square kilo-
metres, Nokrek’s core zone is an impor-
tant source of many perennial rivers and 
streams, including the Simsang, Ganol, 
Bugi, Dareng and Rongdik rivers. One 
of the biggest tourist attractions in the 
area is the Siju Cave, located on a cliff 
overhanging the right bank of the Sim-
sang River. Locally known as Dobakhol 
or the cave of bats, it is the third-longest 
cave in India, and consists of innumer-
able internal chambers and labyrinths 
which have yet to be fully explored.
Pachmarhi, botanical  
and religious sanctuary
Located in the heart of India, the 
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve encom-
passes three wildlife parks – Bori, Sat-
pura, and Pachmarhi. It also includes 
the Satpura Tiger Reserve at its core, 
and the picturesque hill-station of 
Pachmarhi, established by the British 
as a regional army headquarters. 
With cascading waterfalls, ravines 
and gorges sculpted into the red sand-
stone earth, and dense evergreen sal 
and teak forests interspersed with wild 
bamboo groves, Pachmarhi is a veritable 
paradise for botanists and geologists. 
Pachmarhi is also an archaeological trea-
sure house, with rock paintings in cave 
shelters, some of which are estimated 
to be 10,000 years old. Pachmarhi also 
has cultural and religious significance for 
Hindu pilgrims who throng here in large 
numbers every year to celebrate two im-
portant Hindu festivals, Maha Shivratri (in 
March) and Nagpanchmi (in July-August). 
Pachmarhi boasts seven distinct forest 
types, including tropical, moist and dry as 
well as sub-tropical hill forests. A mon-
soon climate, with three distinct seasons, 
ensures a rich and luxurious vegetation. 
Perennial streams and dark shady gorges 
encourage the growth of moisture-loving 
species such as ferns, orchids and rare 
herbs. As many as 71 species of ferns 
and fern allies, and 1190 species of an-
giosperms (flowering plants) have been 
documented. 
Satkoshia Reserve Forests, covering a 
total area of 5500 square kilometres. 
Sustained protection measures and 
management initiatives under the In-
dian government’s ‘Project Tiger’ pro-
gramme have resurrected the dwindling 
population of tigers in the Similipal Tiger 
Reserve, which accounts for nearly half 
the tiger population in Orissa state, on 
India’s east coast. 
Named after the silk cotton trees that 
bloom here, Similipal is a living labora-
tory for environmental scientists. Its 
ecosystems include lush forests, grass-
lands and wetlands, which are inhab-
ited by elephants, panthers, four-horned 
antelopes, giant squirrels and mugger 
crocodiles, besides being the abode of 
tigers, including the rare black and mela-
nistic tigers. It houses 94 species of 
orchids and over 3000 species of other 
plants. 
The tribal inhabitants, who account for 
73 per cent of the total population of 
about 450,000, depend on agriculture, 
hunting and collection of forest products 
for their livelihoods, but need additional 
sources of income. With 75 tribal vil-
lages located inside the tiger reserve, 
and the human population and livestock 
living in close proximity with wildlife, it 
is little wonder that forest officials are 
constantly challenged by man-animal 
conflicts. 
“Our biggest challenge is to protect the 
traditional rights of the forest dwellers, 
while conserving wildlife,” said R. Naga-
raja Reddy, Orissa’s Chief Conservator 
of Forests and Director of the Similipal 
Biosphere Reserve. “The inclusion of 
Similipal in the World Network will lead 
to meaningful exchanges of information, 
experience and personnel. It will also 
considerably help the research of eco-
systems, as well as monitoring and train-
ing work.” 
Besides providing advice, Reddy 
hopes the new designation will “bring 
funding from UNESCO through seed 
funds which could initiate local efforts, 
help broker local projects, and establish 
durable financial mechanisms.” 
For Belinda Wright, Executive Director 
of the Wildlife Protection Society of In-
dia, “The benefits for the sites of joining 
the World Network are largely political. 
With world recognition, the state govern-
ments of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh 
will focus more attention on the protec-
tion and management of these two tiger 
reserves, and this in turn should help 
improve their conditions.” 
(The UNESCO Courier, 2008 - 6)
Nepenthes khasiana L., a plant endemic to 
Meghalaya, found in the Nokrek Biosphere 
Reserve.

Pachmarhi’s dense forest vegetation 
provides an ideal habitat for wild animals, 
including panthers, wild boar, barking 
deer, rhesus macaques and crocodiles, 
besides tigers. The area is home to over 
50 species of mammal, 254 species of 
birds, 30 species of reptiles, and 50 spe-
cies of butterflies. 
The reserve, with a total area of 4926 
square kilometres, comprises 511 villag-
es, with agriculture as the main source 
of income. Poaching, deforestation and 
man-animal conflicts remain the reserve’s 
greatest problems. 
“The international recognition that we 
have gained by being added to the World 
Network will provide tremendous finan-
cial support, needed for the improvement 
of infrastructure,” Nayan Singh Dungriyal, 
Field Director of the Pachmarhi Bio-
sphere Reserve said. “This will allow us 
to discover new approaches to conser-
vation and sustainable development.”
The tigers of Similipal
The Similipal Biosphere Reserve, once 
a royal hunting ground of the Maharaja 
of Mayurbhanj, comprises the Similipal 
Sanctuary, and the adjoining Nato and 
