Second UNESCO General Conference, Mexico City, November 1947. 



                                     The spirit behind the foundation of uneSCo was to foster a 
consciousness of the unity of the human species, in all its diversity. no sooner had the organi- 
        zation been founded, than it embarked upon compiling a new history of humanity. no mean 
feat. Thirty years on, a major revision was needed, with a change in methodology and renewed 
efforts to overcome ideological obstacles. The latest volume came out this year. 
Writing historiEs in thE plural
However, despite the success of 
its wide distribution, the publication 
was not very well received outside 
the West. And rightly so. Through 
no fault of their own, the majority 
of the authors bore the imprint of 
colonialism, which had taken very 
little interest in the history of the 
subjugated civilizations. As a result, 
barely 1.5% of the publication was 
devoted to Africa. 
Also, the links and interactions 
between the history of science and 
cultural history were not sufficiently 
developed in these first volumes, 
even though its mission had been 
to trace the scientific and cultural 
development of mankind.
Then there was the problem of 
methodology. Over the preceding 
three decades, historiography had 
been turning towards anthropologi-
cal research rather than chronologi-
cal history. These new approaches 
had largely been ignored.
he idea of a History of the Sci-
entific and Cultural Development 
of Mankind was put forward by 
UNESCO as early as 1946 and 
can be attributed to the Organiza-
tion’s first Director-General, the 
British scientist, Julian Huxley. 
Naturally, he did not envisage add-
ing yet another history to the large 
number already published which, 
although they claimed to be uni-
versal, nevertheless remained Eu-
rocentric. Quite the opposite. His 
intention was to produce a work of 
collective memory, highlighting the 
contribution made by all peoples to 
universal civilization. This was a dar-
ing endeavour, to say the least, but 
one that fitted well with the ideals of 
the one year-old Organization. 
In 1947, the UNESCO General 
Conference, held in Mexico, decid-
ed to set up an International Scien-
tific Commission to oversee publi-
cation of the History of Humanity. 
Teams of historians got down to 
work three years later, under the 
direction of a Brazilian, Paulo E. de 
Berrêdo Carneiro. The first volume 
appeared in 1961 and the five oth-
ers at regular intervals until 1968. 
(•••)
Shang dynasty (1767  to 1122 B.C.) chariot and bones found in Yin Xu (China).  

Back to square one
“The day will come when what we 
have written […] will, in turn, have to 
be replaced”, said Paulo Carneiro in 
1969, in his introduction to the first 
edition of the History of Humanity. 
“I would like to think that our suc-
cessors will take this task in hand 
and that a revised edition of the 
volumes that we have written will ap-
pear as a new millennium dawns.” 
That day came in 1978, when the 
General Conference decided that 
a complete revision was needed. 
Work began two years later, start-
ing from scratch.
An historian’s work, effectively, 
never ends, and history itself is a 
continuous flow where nothing – 
neither the facts nor their interpre-
tation — is definitive.
UNESCO’s objective had not 
changed – namely, to provide an 
account of universal history through 
the multi-faceted cultural and sci-
entific achievements of humanity 
– but this new project was going 
to be both more detailed and more 
diverse. First of all, a new Interna-
tional Scientific Commission was 
designated, comprising 26 mem-
bers from all over the world, chaired 
by the French historian, Charles 
Morazé. 
An editorial committee of emi-
nent specialists was drawn up for 
each of the seven volumes, which 
spanned pre-history to the 20th 
century. These committees were 
responsible for checking the con-
tents of contributions, discussing 
certain aspects and ensuring ho-
mogeneity of style and approach. 
In parallel, working groups met to 
discuss given issues, whether to do 
with history (such as the impact of 
marronage on Native American so-
ciety) or methodology (e.g. which 
criteria would be used to choose 
one cultural contribution over an-
other). In any event, it was agreed 
that the importance accorded to a 
given historical period should be 
both within the International Com-
mission itself, and between certain 
collaborators. Western historians 
were still following the humanist 
line of the Annales School, a move-
ment founded in 1929 by French 
historians, Marc Bloch and Lucien 
Fèbvre, while the Eastern European 
historians had been trained in the 
Marxist tradition. Unable to find a 
solution, Charles Morazé handed 
in his resignation to the Director 
General of UNESCO. This could 
be catastrophic for the future of the 
project. 
(•••)
Neolithic cave art in Tassili n’Ajjer (Algeria) from 3000 B.C. .

A historic opportunity
Probably because I was both a his-
torian and a member of UNESCO’s 
Executive Council, the Director 
General, Federico Mayor, asked me 
to take over from Charles Morazé, 
in 1989. Never one to refuse a chal-
lenge, I accepted, and immediately 
Gutenberg invents the printing press in Europe (15th century).

Cylinder of Cyrus, King of Persia, considered the first written bill  
of human rights (539 B.C.).
© Cultural Centre of the Islamic Republic of Iran, France



proportional to its contribution, not 
to its duration.
This arrangement seemed to be 
working well, until, a few months lat-
er, Charles Morazé ran into an unex-
pected obstacle: the difficulty, and 
then the impossibility, of reconciling 
the different conceptions of history, 
Writing historiEs in thE plural

set about trying to find a compro-
mise. It was not easy, but luck was 
handed to me on a plate: the Berlin 
Wall fell that same year and, with 
it, the ideological tensions. The ef-
fect was so dramatic that my Bul-
garian colleague and friend, Nicolaï 
Todorov, suggested to his editorial 
committee that the space devoted 
to religions be increased. He even 
organized a meeting in Rome be-
tween Christians and Muslims, 
hosted by the Vatican! 
In an effort to make sure matters 
did not get out of control, as well 
as to ensure that dialogue, interdi-
siciplinarity and knowledge sharing 
remained priorities, I decided, sys-
tematically, to chair all the specialist 
steering group meetings, whether 
they were in France, India, or Jor-
dan. The thematic parts of each 
volume covered vast areas, from 
anthropology to demography and 
legal science, including the effects 
of science and technology on cul-
ture and the arts. In order to treat 
these subjects, the authors had to 
resist ideological pressures in fa-
vour of a multidisciplinary approach. 
They also had to demonstrate the 
interdependence of civilizations, 
whose inventiveness formed part of 
the cultural and scientific heritage 
of humanity.
Today, as I look at the seven vol-
umes of the History of Humanity 
on my bookshelf, I cannot help feel-
ing a certain pride.  And I tell my-
self that this monumental work is a 
defence against an obsession with 
the clash of civilizations that still 
haunts too many minds, undermin-
ing the ideal of the founding fathers 
of UNESCO. 
georges-Henri Dumont, 
Belgian historian, Chairman of the 
International Scientific Commission 
for the History of Humanity, 
since  1989
(•••)
Stylised image of the human genome.

The Berlin Wall. Its fall in 1989 brought about Germany’s reunification on 3 October 1990. 
