Record-breaking China
china, along with the united states, is the world’s largest producer of co2.  
according to pan jiuha, member of china’s delegation to the un summit on climate change in copenhagen, 
his country is not ready to commit to an emission reduction number. nonetheless, china is ready  
to reduce greatly its ‘carbon intensity’ and is beginning to break records in energy efficiency.
Pan Jiahua is interviewed by German journalist Bernhard Bartsch
What are your expectations for the outcome  
of Copenhagen?
China, together with quite a few other nations including the 
G-77 developing countries, is pushing for the implementation of 
the Bali action plan that was concluded in 2007 (Conference 
on Climate Change, Indonesia). In this action plan, it is clear that 
deep cuts have to be made by 2020 and that developing coun-
tries need to take measurable, reportable and verifiable mitiga-
tion action. Financing and adaptation of technology should also 
be included in the Copenhagen document.
Are you are optimistic  
that these goals can be reached?
That mostly depends on the United States. I think the political 
will of the White House is evident. But without the approval of 
Congress, Obama will not be able to make very concrete com-
mitments. And if the US is unable to provide a number for emis-
sion cuts by 2020 in Copenhagen, I don’t think we will have a 
very specific emission reduction number. 
From a Chinese perspective, what is the number 
to which the US should commit?
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has 
recommended that the rich countries should reduce their emis-
sions by 2020 by between 25 and 40 percent, based on the 
year 1990. The Chinese government’s position is that devel-
oped countries should reduce their emissions by at least 40 
percent. The reason is mainly that developed countries should 
take the lead. Currently, their emissions are several times the 
developed countries’ average. If the rich nations cannot reduce 
emissions successfully, they would give developing countries a 
very poor example.
Is China willing to commit itself to any targets?
The Bali road map makes no requirement for developing 
countries to commit themselves to a number of reduction. But 
it seems like the US will only accept a target if China and other 
large developing countries agree to do the same. After all, China 
is the world’s largest producer of CO2.
Mount Huangshan in the mist, one of the natural sites in China inscribed on the World Heritage list.

It is very irrational of the Americans to come up with such a 
demand. It is only an excuse for their own inaction. Their per 
capita emissions are four to five times that of the Chinese, and 
in terms of capital and technology and institutional capability the 
US are supposed to be much superior. If they go back to their 
own history, they can easily understand China’s situation: We 
have some 11 million people going to the urban sector every 
year. These people need housing, infrastructure and employ-
ment – none of that is carbon free. In fact, our energy structure 
is still very carbon intensive: China’s energy consumption is only 
three quarters of that of US, but total emissions are a bit more. 
So at the current stage of industrialisation and urbanisation 
and poverty alleviation, China is not in a position to commit itself 
to emission reduction targets. This is very much in accordance 
with the Kyoto protocol and the principle of “common but dif-
ferentiated responsibilities”. 
Nonetheless, China as a developing country has taken serious 
and substantial mitigation action that has proven to be very ef-
fective. If you look at China’s efforts, no other country has some-
thing comparable to show. At the UN summit in September, 
President Hu Jintao said that China is ready to make a signifi-
cant reduction of carbon intensity. 
China is going to increase its renewable energy to 15 percent. 
That is very ambitious. Although China has no uranium reserves 
of its own, we will increase nuclear power from currently only 10 
GW to 70 GW in ten years. No other country could come up 
with such a large investment in such a short period of time. 
And look at our energy efficiency increase. In the 11th Five 
Year Plan (2006-2010), we have a 20 percent energy intensity 
reduction. In the 12th Five Year Plan, I don’t think we will have 
such a high target, but it will still be high, probably somewhere 
between 10 to 15 percent. Not a single country – not the US, 
not the Europeans and not even the Japanese – has reached 
such a target in five years.
The targets are impressive, indeed.  
But in the past, China has not always been able 
to reach its targets.
I think there should be no problem for China to reach the 20 
percent energy reduction target. The reason is very simple: we 
should thank the financial crisis. Some energy intensive sectors 
are very adversely affected. Less demand for steel or cement 
also leads to reductions in the combus-
tion of coal. So the energy mix is chang-
ing.
But isn’t this only a short-term 
effect? 
You are certainly right. But the financial 
crisis has demonstrated that China’s pro-
duction capacity in these sectors already 
meets demand. We can produce 550 
million tons of steel annually and 4 billion 
tons of cement. That is enough. The idea 
that China will continue to grow exponen-
tially is wrong.
So when do you expect China’s 
coal consumption to peak?
For energy consumption, the current un-
derstanding is that the very capital and en-
ergy intensive process of urbanisation will 
peak before 2020. Between 2020 and 
2030 we will then have a phase of con-
solidation, and after 2030, China will go into a rather low-energy 
kind of post-industrialisation phase. The energy increase will be 
minimal and total energy consumption will probably peak some 
time around 2035. However, the peak of coal should be well 
before 2035, because we have very aggressive investments in 
nuclear and renewables like wind, solar and hydropower.
This is very ambitious, but the bottom line  
is that it will hardly be enough to keep  
global warming below two degrees Celsius.
You are certainly right. That is why we have come up with the 
carbon budget proposal. From a starting point to an end point, 
we will sum up all global emissions and then divide them by the 
world population on a per capita basis. Then you can see how 
much every country has used already and how much it has left. 
And if there is a shortage you buy and if you have a surplus, you 
can use your own. This will lead to a new financial mechanism: 
The carbon using rights can flow from poor to rich countries and 
capital will flow from rich to poor countries.
In China, eleven million people migrate to urban areas every year.

Pan Jiahua  
is Director of the Climate Change Programme  
at the Research Centre for Sustainable Development  
at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,  
China’s leading government think tank.
