w hen European explorers began 
arriving on Australian shores in the 
1600s they attempted to describe 
Aboriginal Australians; this contin-
ued during the colonisation of Aus-
tralia from 1788. But Aboriginal lan-
guages, artistic representations of 
their reality and Aboriginal relation-
ship to the land meant nothing to 
the new arrivals. The cultures were 
so different that European descrip-
tions were, for the most part, vague, 
misleading or inaccurate. Although 
the accounts are valuable referenc-
es, we cannot depend on them. 
On land, a lot of Aboriginal ar-
chaeological work has been under-
taken. This has provided important 
insight into the immense antiquity 
of Aboriginal Australia – establish-
ing a date of at least 60,000 years. 
Where this work is in partnership 
with Aboriginal people and draws 
upon their oral histories, it helps 
society as a whole to better under-
stand the enormous achievements 
and endurance of Aboriginal cul-
tures. 
Underwater sites have the poten-
tial to reveal much more. Above wa-
ter, we can only look at the places 
where people moved when the sea 
rose or where water never covered 
the land. Furthermore, most organic 
and inorganic materials can survive 
better underwater than on land! 
Although the sea destroys when 
waves hit the shore, it becomes 
very protective once material is on 
the seabed. 
Only limited studies have been 
undertaken in Australia. Artefact 
and habitation sites have been re-
corded in Lake Jasper, Western 
Australia, by Dr Charles Dortch and 
the Western Australian Museum 
in the late 1980s. In 2007 an ar-
chaeological survey (by the author, 
James Wheeler and Cosmos Coro-
neos, assisted by volunteers from 
the Underwater Research Group) 
searched for potential underwater 
rock shelters in a protected estu-
ary south of Sydney. In this area, 
numerous rock overhangs above 
water had been used as rock shel-
ters. Under water, rock overhangs 
were found but it was not possible, 
within the scope of this survey, to 
confirm whether these had been 
used as shelters. What the study 
did show was that their form was 
consistent with their above water 
counterparts. 
Meticulous archaeological investi-
gation will be required to unveil such 
sites, hidden for tens of thousands 
of years – and the task will not be 
easy. Anyone who has searched for 
shipwrecks knows how difficult it 
is to even find large iron naval ves-
sels. Looking for artefact scatters, 
rocks quarried to make stone tools, 
hearths, stone fish traps and other 
such vestiges even in shallow water 
will be difficult. However, if offshore 
peat beds from old submerged la-
goons have survived, these may 
hold the key. Perhaps a core sam-
ple from an offshore drilling opera-
tion will one day open up a whole 
new chapter on Australia’s Aborigi-
nal past? 
David Nutley, 
Department for Environment 
& Heritage, Australia
as the world’s largest island and smallest continent, australia is relatively isolated. 
     for tens of thousands of years aboriginal australians developed distinct cultures  
           in relative stability. major wars, invasions, mass migrations and cultural upheavals 
                                  bypassed this land – at least until the 18th century.
Fish trap, Darling River (Australia).



The key  
To ausTralian ancienT hisTory  
under waTer?
