Let me first say that I am delighted to 
start working with UNESCO more 
formally in my new role. I intend to 
work closely with all experts, adding 
value where I can to the framework 
of action provided by the United Na-
tions Literacy Decade (UNLD, 2003-
2012). This framework proposes 
a new vision of literacy, by situating 
Literacy for All at the heart of Educa-
tion for All and by promoting it as a 
key for development and essential for 
the health and well-being of people 
everywhere. I will advocate these im-
portant messages, with the aim of 
helping to make a difference and cre-
ate new dynamics. 
Literacy is about people, and thus 
literacy lies at the heart of society. I 
want to appeal to everyone to join 
forces for the benefit of develop-
ment of both people and societies. 
To tackle this complex issue structur-
ally, we will also have to think outside 
of the box at times when it comes to 
solutions and involving stakeholders, 
from governments to business, from 
municipalities to educational experts 
and illiterates themselves. It’s only 
by joining forces that we can make a 
real impact. It will therefore come as 
no surprise that I will focus on reach-
ing out to those not yet fully aware or 
committed, rather than on preaching 
to the converted. 
Literacy is a vital means of human 
development. It is an enabling skill 
for further learning opportunities 
in the framework of lifelong learn-
ing. It leads to empowerment, so-
cial inclusion, health and better life 
chances. Everyone deserves to 
have those chances. So we need 
to urgently mobilise our entire so-
cieties to tackle illiteracy structu- 
rally, also by linking prevention and 
reduction. I would like to convince 
the key actors of the enormous 
potential of literacy and also show 
them the actual costs of illiteracy 
for our societies. And all this against 
the backdrop that we have no time to 
waste.
Excerpts from an interview given  
to EduInfo (UNESCO Education Sector) 
          literacy is at the heart of our societies, 
     says Princess laurentien of the netherlands, 
    who was named uneSco’s Special envoy on literacy 
    for Development last march. for more than 20 years, 
she has been fighting illiteracy in her homeland 
        where the problem has been neglected.
alphabet  
of development ©

Princess Laurentien of the Netherlands,  
UNESCO Special Envoy on Literacy for Development.

“We work on the principle of a snow-
ball effect to reach out and involve busi-
ness, social and government partners 
who can make a key contribution to this 
area,” she has said. The foundation en-
courages a diverse range of formal and 
non-formal educational initiatives, and 
forms partnerships with all kinds of or-
ganizations in society, from trade unions 
to prisons to child healthcare centres: 
“We choose promising and innovative 
projects tackling low literacy aimed at 
young people and adults, but also mobi-
lizing the business community, parents 
and educational organizations. We have 
built our approach around the literacy 
‘marketplace’ creating and matching 
supply and demand.” 
the literacy market
honorary president of the Dutch  
Association of Public libraries,  
Princess laurentien also lends her 
support to the Dutch language Society 
and the listening and braille library of 
the netherlands. In 2004, she founded 
the reading & Writing foundation 
(Stichting lezen & Schrijven) to raise 
awareness and develop pilot projects 
to get more actors involved in the fight 
against illiteracy.
Princess Laurentien in the field.
