What affinities do you share 
with Master Fan Zeng  
and how are you different? 
What Master Fan Zen and I share, 
above all, is our relationship to na-
ture. We see the same things, and 
translate this through calligraphy. 
Don’t forget that calligraphy is the 
art of stylizing the written word, 
which was invented by observing 
nature. In his inventory of visual 
forms, Marc Changizi, a researcher 
at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Insti-
tute in Troy in the USA, demonstrat-
ed some fifty elements that appear 
both in nature and in four families 
of script: cuneiform, hieroglyphics, 
Chinese and Maya. For both Master 
Fan Zeng and myself, calligraphy 
embodies our “being in the world”. 
How do we differ? In our relation-
ship to society. Chinese writing, 
which originated 4000 before the 
Christian era, remains deeply root-
ed in nature. There is a direct link 
between rock art and Chinese char-
acters, which have hardly changed 
in six thousand years. That is why, 
across the ages, the line of ink cast 
by the Chinese calligrapher’s brush 
continues, instantly, to take the form 
of a horse, ox or a tiger. It takes the 
skill of a Master to chant the rhythm 
of time. 
But Persian calligraphy has assim-
ilated a series of outside influences. 
I am thinking of the Arab-inspired 
kufi (angular and geometric) and 
naskh (supple and rounded) scripts, 
abandoned in the 14th century, as 
the art moved closer to nature, from 
which it derived the gentle curves so 
typical of the nas’taliq style, which 
inspires my own work. To give you 
an example, in this script, the egg 
is symbolized by a voluptuous loop 
that seems to take flight, light as an 
eyelash.
This slow progression towards 
other visions – Mongolian, Arab, 
Turkish, Indian, etc. – which are 
reflected in body language and 
therefore also in the gestures of 
the calligrapher, means that Persian 
calligraphy also has a stylized view 
of [what French psychoanalyst, 
Jacques Lacan called] the “speak-
ing being”, this “desiring being” that 
lives in the metropolis. Chinese cal-
ligraphy, on the other hand, remains 
confined to nature, which it distils or 
sublimates. Why is this? I am not a 
specialist of far-eastern philosophy, 
but I think the explanation may be 
found in the notion of detachment 
with respect to desire, as advocat-
ed by Buddhism.
Your encounter with Master Fan 
Zen is more than simply the 
sum of your similarities and  
dissimilarities. Do you have  
the impression of having  
established a genuine dialogue?
The very fact that we are present, 
side-by-side, is a form of dialogue 
– a dialogue between what is 
common to both of us, and what 
calligraphy,  
The arT of making words sing
(•••)
               Persian calligraphy bears the imprint of a range of influences, 
while chinese calligraphy remains deeply rooted in local tradition, explains iranian 
painter, calligrapher and psychoanalyst, hassan Makaremi. But, whatever its history, 
calligraphy embodies our sense of “being in the world”.
“From rock art to human rights”, painting by Hassan Makaremi.

At UNESCO’s International Festival of Cultural Diversity in May this year, Hassan Makaremi  
and the Chinese Grand Master Fan Zeng, gave a presentation entitled, “Dialogue on Calligraphy”. 
In this interview by Monique Couratier for the UNESCO Courier, he explains how the Persian 
Nas’taliq style of calligraphy has enabled him to put his ideals into colour and movement,  
in a personal quest that combines poetic intuition and scientific rigour.

separates us. So what is the fruit 
of this dialogue? No less than life 
itself! Our commitment to use our 
brush to trace the curve of the uni-
verse is a message, which says 
that humanity, in all its diversity, is 
nevertheless one. 
If I often use the tree as a meta-
phor, it is because humanity has 
common roots, which give it a 
unity, thousands of branches that 
provide its diversity (its people, 
who are both so different and 
yet so intermixed) and countless 
leaves, the undulating products 
of its creative genius. Without 
its roots, firmly anchored in the 
ground, without its branches – 
even if some die while others 
flourish – without its leaves, con-
tinually “started afresh”, the tree 
could not survive. 
And you might say, what about 
violence? It arises from the fact 
that certain peoples or individuals 
think that they exist apart from ev-
erything else, outside this common 
“décor” of our humanity. But, with-
out the sentiment of belonging to 
the same species and without the 
recognition of diversity, humanity 
could not continue to survive. This 
is the message of our exchange 
between Chinese and Persian cal-
ligraphy. This is also the message 
of the United Nations, whose New 
York headquarters has a poem by 
the illustrious Persian poet, Sa’adi 
[see box] inscribed over the en-
trance to its Hall of Nations, and 
of UNESCO, with which I would 
be honoured to continue my col-
laboration to promote “cultural di-
versity in dialogue”.
Why has calligraphy  
not flourished in the West? 
What can it give us today?
In the West, since the 16th cen-
tury, the choice has been made to 
(•••)
opt for rapidity and efficacy, nota-
bly by trying to gain mastery over 
nature. In the East, the preference 
has been to “tell it” to “write it”, in its 
fullness and looseness, in its curves 
and silences, by leaving the space 
for interpretation, for freedom … 
Far from my training as a scien-
tist, there is this idea of renounc-
ing rigour, clarity and concision. 
But I know that the computer 
keyboard will never replace the 
hand. And I reckon that, today, 
calligraphy represents added 
value. In a motion that is in har-
mony with nature, like a whirling 
Dervish, the gesture of the cal-
ligrapher-philosopher-poet turns 
the words of the Universe into 
song. That is nas’taliq calligraphy: 
the alchemy of life!
calligraphy, The arT of making words sing
Poem by Sa’adi, celebrated 13th century Persian poet. “Whirling Dervish”, painting by Hassan Makaremi.
