This is the twentieth time I have 
come to work with the Dogon paint-
ers of Koyo, high up on their table 
mountain in the north of Mali. In the 
black of night, we all stretch out on 
mats outside the mud house set 
aside for me, in the centre of the 
village. The farmer-painters and I 
are exhausted, but happy with the 
poem-paintings that we have just 
made on cloth, under the burning 
sun. The youngest of the painters is 
making tea. Our conversation turns 
to the ancestors. 
Suddenly there is a sharp pain 
in my left hand. I grab my torch. A 
white scorpion has just stung me. I 
kill it. I panic at first and imagine that 
it will all be over for me in an hour. 
Then I think that I have thirty min-
utes of – relative – peace before the 
convulsions start. So I ask the head 
of the village if he has any traditional 
antidote to the venom. “No,” he re-
plies, “just wait. You will see.” The 
conversation starts again. My hand 
then my arm feel as though they are 
on fire. But, two hours later, the pain 
has stopped. I fall into a deep sleep, 
with the head of the village staying 
to sleep beside me. A mystery. 
Three days later, all eight of us – 
the six painters, the chief and my-
self – reach the foot of the cliff at 
the top of the mountain, ten kilome-
tres from the village, where each 
monsoon storm turns into a mas-
sive waterfall. This place, where the 
water thunders, chants and sings 
almost all summer, is the source of 
many a legend. Caves protected 
by initiations bear ancient pictorial 
signs. But I know that they are also 
home to awesome cobras. I ask the 
painters if they have any medicine 
against their venom. “No. Sit down 
and we’ll explain.”
All of reality is speech
I will try to put together here what 
was passed on to me that morning, 
and so many times before, using the 
signs and symbols that the painters 
draw when, in our poem-paintings, 
we tell of the profound life of this 
place. 
All of reality is speech; it is made 
and mellowed on the plateau at the 
top of the mountains. The beautiful 
round or flat stones are petrified, 
dense speech. Water is language 
laughing; the sky is its distant fore-
shadowing, the clouds its gestation 
and rain its joyful roar. The sown 
seed is a promised word: and, if 
the farmer sings, it increases its 
fertile strength. Here, the crops are 
farmed with the hoe and a song. 
The language of my companions, 
after all, is called Toro Tegu, “word 
of the mountain” and is one of the 
fifteen Dogon languages, with 
about 5000 native speakers. The 
thE monkEys, 
thE scorpion 
and thE snakE
According to tradition, the cobra is the guardian of the Toro Tegu 
language spoken in Dogon country, in Mali.
(•••)
     stone is petrified speech, water is language
    laughing, the sown seed, a promised word:  
every element of reality is an integral part of Toro
      Tegu, currently spoken by some 5000 dogons 
                   in the north of Mali.

For Koyo villagers, the top of the mountain embodies the power of the word. 
Coming down the mountain, the word becomes weaker.

Dogon from this ethnic group call 
themselves Toro Nomu, “people of 
the mountain”. 
The speciality of the Koyo village 
community, about 500 individu-
als, is to energize the fertility of the 
word through farming practices 
and rites. The community is bro-
ken down into small groups of six 
to eight individuals, who are linked 
forever and share at least one meal 
a day together. There is the group 
responsible for the collective grain 
stores, which are “reservoirs of the 
word”, the group responsible for 
rainmaking rites, the group respon-
sible for maintaining cliff paths, etc. 
Each group, of course, has its ref-
erence ancestor and only acts for 
the benefit of the community as a 
whole. 
The dynamic harmony of reality is 
regularly recast through nocturnal 
singing and dancing by a special-
ized group of “women elders”. The 
choreography includes a regular, 
wide, horizontal sweep with the 
right arm, which signifies sowing 
the word as if it were a seed.
The word at work
Since 2002, the painters, the 
head of the village and I – the poet 
of the written word – have formed a 
support group. We spread cloth or 
paper onto the flat rocks, like the 
fine loam of the market gardens, 
then I lay the “seeds” of the poem, 
while they lay the “seeds” of picto-
rial signs. These textiles and sheets 
of paper are then exhibited all over 
the world, bringing income, a “har-
vest” that feeds the village. We have 
been able to build a school, five 
reservoirs, which have doubled the 
area under cultivation, three “Paint-
ers’ Houses” which can be visited, 
etc., as part of a development proj-
ect for the village [see ‘Koyo, a place 
for dialogue between two cultures’, 
UNESCO Courier , n° 4, 2008]. 
Our group has two reference an-
cestors, because it soon spawned 
other groups, responsible for main-
taining the school, the “Painters’ 
Houses” and other fruits of our 
development project. “We have de-
cided that you have become Dog-
on,” the painters tell me, “and you 
must add the names of these two 
ancestors to yours. The last time 
a foreigner was allowed to join us 
was five centuries ago. He is the 
one who painted the symbols in 
one of the caves near to the great 
waterfall. He is one of our two refer-
(•••)
ence ancestors. But now he is the 
last but one foreigner to be accept-
ed, because you are the last.” 
According to Toro Nomu, every-
thing on the mountaintop is the 
word at work and in harmony with 
itself. Animals are also elements 
of this. But, in contrast, everything 
that is beneath these high plateaux 
– like a ravine, a gorge or even a 
42 kilometre-wide plain, separating 
the two plateaux – bears the gener-
ic name of pondo: here the word is 
weak, shapeless, undulating, shifting. 
Above all, it is the word of the nomad-
ic herders, who have held feudal rule 
over the plain for centuries 
“Our hordes of monkeys shake the 
word into confusion”, the painters 
continue, “but the scorpions and 
cobras are creatures that the word 
uses to protect itself. If they come 
across a stranger, they kill him. But 
they never attack us”. 
“Ah, that is why the scorpion stung 
me the other evening!” 
“No, no, you still haven’t understood. 
Make an effort! You speak Toro Tegu. 
You have become Dogon. The scor-
pion made a mistake when he stung 
you. Who is dead, him or you?” 
Yves Bergeret, 
French poet
thE monkEys, thE scorpion and thE snakE
The “Painters’ House” in the Dogon village of Boni. At right, the snake motif.
