Contemporary Indian Films  
for International Understanding
  by Kwaja Ahmad Abbas 
Comparatively speaking, India has had practically no opportunity of exporting her culture through the 
medium of the cinema. The few Indian films that have ever crossed the seas have been seen by very 
limited audiences, and it is still doubtful whether they will ever be able to compete successfully with 
American and European products in the foreign market.
But there is no reason why an attempt should not be made to secure at least a specialized and select 
audience abroad for the right type of Indian films. Some of our Ambassadors have already taken steps 
to secure good Indian films for exhibition in their Embassies. Film societies, cultural organizations and 
educational institutions in all countries would surely welcome opportunities of seeing, from time to 
time, a representative selection of Indian films. 
But it is important that foreign audiences should learn to look at Indian films as a mirror of Indian life, 
and should not expect that universality of interest, which the standardized product from Hollywood 
is able to provide. The foreigner is sometimes apt to complain that Indian films are inordinately long, 
though none of them, so far, has beaten the record of Gone With The Wind. 
It is true, however, that the tempo of story development in an average Indian film is slower than in its 
Hollywood counterpart. So, to a foreigner, it seems longer. 
This criticism applies not only to film-making but to a whole way of life. The Indian films are slow be-
cause the tempo of Indian life is slow. The Indian films will acquire the nervous tension and mounting 
Kwaja Ahmad Abbas (1914 – 1987), 
Indian filmmaker and producer, 
was the sponsor of the Indian Peoples’ Theatre Movement. 

A scene from The Light of Asia (1925), with Human Rai and Seeta Devi.

tempo of a Hollywood thriller when the impact of industrial-
ism has created the same psychological atmosphere in India 
as in England and America.
The preponderance of songs in an Indian film has been its 
most exasperating feature for foreigners and even for west-
ernized Indians. The commercial (and, therefore, primary) 
reason is that the cinema in India has developed into an om-
nibus entertainment for millions of uprooted peasants and 
small town folk who have lost their rich traditions of folk song 
and folk dance and found nothing to substitute it in the cities 
and the big towns. 
Again, through religious musical expressions like kirtan, 
bhajan and qawwali, the song is woven into the fabric of Indian 
life more closely and intimately than in any other country. 
What kind of Indian films should be shown abroad? There 
can be as many answers as the different varieties of films pro-
duced by us. Some would favour mythological and puranic 
films as they represent the ‘spiritual’ heritage of India; others 
would favour the historical films about our emperors and em-
presses to show to the world ‘the Glory that was India’. No 
doubt their colourful pageantry would appeal to the Western 
audiences as they approximate more closely to the average 
Westerner’s notions of the ‘exotic’ East.
The modern-minded ultra-realists would ban the export 
of all such films and insist that only films on contemporary 
themes should be sent abroad. But, again, there would be a 
divergence of views as to whether it is advisable to send out 
some of our films that expose our social evils, as that might 
create an unfavourable impression about India. 
If the task were left to me, I would select the following ten 
films for international screening. I wouldn’t say they are the 
Ten Best Indian Films, though obviously some of them would 
come in that category; but, taken together, they provide a 
more or less complete cross-section of India – and the In-
dian cinema. Here, then, is my list:
1. Seeta (East Indian Films). This, in my opinion, is the most 
dignified, the most beautiful and the most meaningful mytho-
logical film so far produced in India. It has none of the tinselly 
gaudiness that characterizes some of the more elaborate and 
expensive films on the same theme.
2. Yidyapati (New Theatres). Regarded by many as 
Devaki Bose’s greatest and last masterpiece, this film should be 
included because it handles a typically Indian emotional-mys-
tic theme in an artistic manner, and also represents a distinct 
era in Indian history and a (somewhat idealized) picture of old 
feudal society.
3. Pukar (Minerva). Though technically better films have 
been produced on Moghal themes, this remains the most 
impressive and significant of them all. Through this story of 
Jehangir’s sense of justice, the world will get a glimpse of all 
that was best in the Moghal era.
4. Tukaram (Prabhat). Dozens of devotional pictures about 
every conceivable saint in India have been made, but in utter 
simplicity, fidelity of detail and humanistic approach, Tukaram 
remains unbeaten. One need not believe in miracles or even 
in religion to believe in a human being like Tukuram; the prole-
tarian saint who preached a good life by his good actions. 
5. Devdas (New Theatres). Here is the classic story of emo-
tional frustration, written by the inimitable Sarat Chatterjee, 
and filmed with a youthful artistic flair by Barua. 
6. President (New Theatres). A modern melodrama in 
Hollywood style, the ‘father and founder’ of the boy-meets-
girl films in India, and director/screenwriter Nitin Bose’s 
abiding contribution to Indian film.
7. Unexpected (Prabhat). Directed by Shantaram in the 
days when be believed in utter realism, and the first daring 
and progressive picture on the theme of forced marriages.
8. Bari Didi (New Theatres). The most beautifully poignant 
story or a widow’s frustrated emotions, handled with rare art-
istry and dignified restraint.
9. Dharti Ke Lal or Children of the Earth (People’s 
Theatre). The first non-commercial, realistic feature-docu-
mentary on the grim tragedy of the Bengali Famine. 
10. Doctor Kotnis (Rajkamal). Shantaram’s filmic tribute to 
the young Indian doctor who died a martyr’s death in China, 
while serving humanity, along with the Congress Medical 
Mission. The right note on which to conclude this series of 
films representing India. 
 (The UNESCO Courier, Supplement; II, 1949-4)
Pramathesh Barua and Jamuna Barua in Devdas, 1935, a film by Barua. 
The script was written by Sarat Chatterjee.
