Connie Hedegaard, European Commissioner on Climate.

Double or quits on climate in Denmark
the european commissioner on climate, connie hedegaard, firmly believes that  
the un conference on climate change (cop 15) must conclude with an agreement on reductions  
to predicted 2020 levels of carbon dioxide emissions. even if the outcome is not a legally binding agreement 
 – us president barack obama has not received the backing of congress –  
the future of the planet hangs in the balance of this conference
In Denmark, global warming deniers claim that 
the left is using alleged climate change  
as a Trojan horse to increase state control over  
society. How do you reconcile your membership 
of the conservative party with a commitment  
to combat climate change? 
The conservative party considers that it is up to us to 
pass on to the next generation what we have inherited 
from previous generations. This is the essence of conser-
vatism. Looking after our climate and the environment is 
therefore the most important task for conservatives in the 
21st century.
The vast majority of scientists agree  
on the causes and impacts of climate change,  
but ordinary people do not always seem to realize 
the scale of the challenges we are facing.  
What role can politicians play here? 
A great many people, all over the world, have helped to 
spread awareness of this challenge, which outstrips by far 
the challenges of the next State or municipal budget. If we 
do not take up the challenge, we will simply be passing on 
the bill to those who come after us. 
What should the relationship be between the possibilities 
for development in the North and in the South? How can 
we avoid millions of climate refugees? How to ensure ac-
cess to energy resources without starting wars? We have 
to find answers to all of these fundamental questions at 
the same time, which means a policy for security. 
Even though the subject is of immense complexity, it is re-
assuring to note that political agendas have succeeded in 
getting people to understand that nature imposes its own 
limits. We cannot carry on consuming regardless. I believe 
that we are seeing the beginning of a paradigm shift. Look 
at how long it has taken for consumer spending to take 
off again after the financial crisis. Why? Because people 
may be wondering if having a whole range of electronic 
gadgets has really made them any happier. Maybe they are 
asking themselves if they could hang onto things for a little 
longer. The ‘throwaway’ era has perhaps come to an end.
 What results must the COP15 conference 
achieve if it is not to be regarded as a failure? 
In Copenhagen, we have to arrive at commitments by the 
industrialized countries to reduce their CO2 emissions, 
and for developing countries to pursue growth strategies 
Interview by Niels Boel,  
Danish correspondent for the UNESCO Courier  and coordinator for this special feature.

within a perspective of sustainability. We have to arrive 
at firm commitments on policies for adapting to climate 
change and the transfer of technology, and for this we 
need a concrete funding plan. 
The estimated cost of aiding developing countries to 
combat climate change is about 100 billion Euros per year 
from now until 2020. The funding has to come from public 
budgets and the carbon market, but in any case, a global 
“greening” of politics is needed. Instead of building yet 
another polluting coal-fired power station, we should be 
building one that is clean. Of course this will cost more. 
But when we say “costs more”, we have to count only the 
difference in costs between polluting technologies and 
clean technologies, and not the money that we would have 
to spend in any case. 
 How can we ensure the transfer of less polluting 
and renewable sources of energy to developing 
countries? 
The carbon market is one solution. If rich countries and 
their industries are committed to reducing their emissions, 
it is in their interest, when they carry out a major project in 
India, for example, to use less polluting technologies.
Another solution is the Major Economies Forum on En-
ergy and Climate [created in March 2008 by President 
Obama and bringing together 17 countries with the aim 
of ‘facilitating a frank exchange between developing and 
developed countries’ [Editor’s note] where seven or eight 
technological areas have been defined. Denmark is mak-
ing a contribution to the Forum on wind energy.
One of the major challenges in combating global warm-
ing is keeping average temperature increase below two 
degrees Celsius. But we know that even an increase of 
1.5°C will endanger some small island nations and low-
lying coastal areas. 
Yes, we talk about a 2°C maximum. But achieving this re-
quires a scale of adjustments that it is difficult to imagine. 
It means that industrialized countries have to reduce their 
CO2 emissions by 24% to 40% compared to 1990 levels. 
This is enormous. If COP15 reaches agreement on this 
objective, it would already be an achievement.
 What do you think about the fact that COP15 will 
not conclude with a legally binding agreement?
The United States is not ready. The Senate is dragging 
its heels in voting through the climate law proposed by 
President Obama’s administration. What is important is to 
set a deadline in Copenhagen. Without a concrete dead-
line, the process could take forever.
Could Denmark serve as a model in the fight 
against global warming? 
For the past 30 years we have succeeded in maintain-
ing economic growth without increasing our energy con-
sumption. This is attracting a great deal of interest across 
the world. What people fear most is the prospect of their 
growth rate falling if they take measures to slow climate 
change. Denmark’s experience shows that this need not 
be the case – it is possible to be energetically efficient 
while increasing exports, and reducing unemployment at 
the same time. 
Denmark has, for example, become world leader in pro-
ducing energy by waste incineration. With the backing of 
citizens and municipalities, we have found beneficial solu-
tions that also give a better energy yield. It is a matter of 
organizing refuse collection, incinerating it and distribut-
ing the heat recovered through an urban heating network. 
Here, in all its simplicity, is one of the reasons that Den-
mark can inspire other countries.
Rooftop air conditioning units in Istanbul (Turkey).

Kewet EI-Jet, Danish-designed electric car.
Danish Environment Minister since 2004 and Climate Minister since 2007, 
connie hedegaard has recently been nominated European Union Com-
missioner on Climate. A former journalist, she has helped to turn the country 
around – after it had flirted with stubborn resistance and denial on climate 
change issues – and to transform a responsible environment policy into the 
government’s flagship. She is president of the COP15 climate summit in 
Copenhagen.
