The puzzle shows the harmful effects of pollution. 
“Green Tents” project, Bolivia.
ESD promotes values such as peace, 
equality and respect for others and 
for the wider natural and social envi-
ronment. ESD is about empowering 
learners with the knowledge, skills 
and values to become real agents of 
change.
Rethinking  
education’s goals 
The recent UNESCO World Con-
ference on Education for Sustainable 
Development held in Bonn, Germany 
(31 March to 2 April) showed that 
many countries have designed inno-
vative ESD policy frameworks. The 
Decade has encouraged countries 
to rethink the purposes of education, 
curriculum content and pedagogical 
practice in ways that are complemen-
tary to the drive to achieve Education 
for All. 
The DESD is generating a myriad of 
initiatives and projects that are put-
ting ESD into practice in schools and 
extra-curricular settings. But prog-
ress remains uneven and much more 
needs to be done to increase pub-
lic awareness about ESD. Now we 
have to work together to ensure that 
ESD becomes a guiding principle for 
improving the relevance and qual-
ity of education, through appropri-
ate engagement with policy-makers, 
teacher training institutions, universi-
ties and other key partners. Finally, 
we must take every opportunity to 
stress the centrality of education for 
sustainable development.
A response  
to the global crisis
The financial and economic crisis 
makes this injunction more timely 
than ever. We will not succeed in 
reducing poverty and building more 
inclusive, peaceful and sustainable 
societies without empowering in-
dividuals at all ages with the 
knowledge, skills and values 
to make responsible and in-
formed choices. Quality educa-
tion that promotes awareness, 
openness, solidarity and respon- 
sibility must be part of any re-
sponse to today’s global crisis. 
As this issue of the UNESCO Cou-
rier illustrates, much can be done 
when students, teachers, schools 
and communities mobilize to address 
social and environmental challenges. 
But leaders and policy-makers must 
create the conditions for education 
at all levels to be geared towards 
building more just and sustainable 
societies. 
Nicholas Burnett, 
Assistant Director-General for Education, 
UNESCO
 towards building more just  
and sustainable societies.
What is education for Sustainable Development?  
It is education that banks on the future. It is designed to enable us 
to face the major challenges of today: preserving the environment, 
respecting biodiversity, protecting human rights.
Education for sustainable development  
highlights the social, environmental,  
economic and cultural aspects  
of development.


Just over two decades ago, the 
World Commission on Environment 
and Development made an appeal 
for a “development that meets the 
needs of the present without com-
promising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs.” In a 
nutshell, this captures the essence of 
sustainability – a long-term vision that 
speaks to our sense of responsibility 
for the present and future. 
This vision underpins the eight Mil-
lennium Development Goals en-
dorsed by the majority of the world’s 
countries in 2000. They aim to allevi-
ate extreme poverty and hunger, im-
prove child and maternal health, com-
bat HIV and AIDS, achieve universal 
primary education, and promote gen-
der equality and environmental sus-
tainability. Education is imperative for 
reaching these goals, a conviction 
that underlies the UN Decade of Ed-
ucation for Sustainable Development 
(DESD) launched in 2005. 
ESD sets new directions for learn-
ing. First, it requires an interdisci-
plinary approach that integrates the 
social, environmental, economic and 
cultural dimensions of development 
and generates awareness of our in-
terdependence - with others, with the 
world around us, and with nature. It 
enables us to address such issues as 
environmental protection, biodiversity 
and human rights. Second, ESD im-
parts skills such as critical thinking, 
decision-making and problem-solv-
ing. In this regard, teachers have an 
influential role to play in encouraging 
more dialogue, team work and initia-
tive. Third and most fundamentally, 
