Samarkand, Bukhara, Herat… cit-
ies of dreams. Genghis Khan, Ta-
merlane, Akbar… characters who 
marked history. Avicenna, Khayyam, 
Ulugh Beg… thinkers who trans-
formed worldviews. These names 
were inscribed down through the 
ages on a territory that corresponds 
not to a specific region of the an-
cient world but to a permanent 
crossroads of exchanges between 
peoples: Central Asia.  Since antiq-
uity, Scythians, Hsiung-nu and Khi-
tai roamed this area, from the Cas-
pian Sea to the Chinese border, 
setting the foundations for the great 
civilizations of Asia and Europe. 
The History of Civilizations of 
Central Asia covers this immense 
expanse, which, until the 16th cen-
tury was essentially given over to 
steppe pastoralism, with agricul-
ture only possible in a few favoured 
places, like oases. Accordingly, it 
has given birth to little that has been 
original to human life and culture. 
                                   Central asia, crossroads and meeting-place of cultures, has also known periods 
                   when it was closed off from the outside world. The History of Civilizations of Central Asia 
             shows that despite ideological barriers, historical and cultural links 
                            between inhabitants weave a regional identity.
Falconry in the Kyrgyz steppes. 
Dome of a mosque in Samarkand (Uzbekistan).



However, its position as the heart-
land of the Asian continent has 
given it a unique position as a cor-
ridor for the movement of peoples, 
religions and ideas, and for cultural 
and artistic currents. The more fa-
voured, settled regions to the south 
and east of the core region have, 
over the past four or five millennia, 
given birth to several religions and 
civilizations of the Near East, Iran, 
India and China. Influences from all 
these have been significant for the 
evolution of Central Asia. 
A land bridge
The region of the steppes acted as 
a land bridge between the great civi-
lizations of south-western, southern 
and eastern Asia, which intervening 
mountain ranges and deserts have, 
throughout recorded history, largely 
separated from each other. Obvious 
examples here include the so-called 
‘Silk Route’ running across Central 
Asia from East Asia to Iran, the 
Near East and the Greco-Byzantine 
worlds of the later pre-Christian 
and early Christian times, which not 
(•••)
stEppEs  
and thE silk routE

syncretism with existing beliefs and 
practices there, such as those of 
shamanism.  
Closing and opening
The History of Civilizations of Cen-
tral Asia has thus been designed 
to show that Central Asia deserves 
consideration, in its own right, as a 
distinct entity of human history, and 
also because it has functioned as 
a crossroads and meeting-place for 
the civilizations of East and West 
during past millennia. 
Passing to our own time, it also 
provides the historical background 
for the vastly increased openness 
of the region during the last two de-
cades or so after the tightly closed 
period of Soviet domination and 
Cold War rivalries. The open terrain 
of much of the region had, in earlier 
times, always made it accessible to 
outside influences and movements 
of peoples. But, at the turn of the 
20th century, despite lengthy lines 
of communication and the conse-
quent slowness of travelling, en-
only conveyed luxury textiles from 
China to the Levant and ultimately 
to Europe but also, in the reverse 
direction, brought Sasanian silver-
ware from Iran into Central Asia and 
as far as Siberia and what is now 
Russia, and Roman gold to Central 
Asia and north-western India..
Greco-Roman influences were 
likewise a major factor in the devel-
opment of an art like that of Gand-
hara in eastern Afghanistan and 
north-western India. In Islamic times, 
other Chinese luxury goods like ce-
ramics made the long and hazard-
ous land journey across Central 
Asia to centres of consumption like 
Nishapur, Ray, Isfahan, Baghdad 
and other great cities of the caliph-
ate and its successor states, thus 
supplementing sea traffic through 
the Indian Ocean. 
In the realm of ideas, various of 
the great religions of the Old World 
spread across Central Asia to oth-
er parts of the continents, such as 
Zoroastrianism from Iran into Tran-
soxania (corresponding roughly to 
modern Uzbekistan) and Khwarazm 
(between today’s Uzbekistan and 
Turkmenistan). Buddhism went 
(•••)
forth from India to conquer China 
and Mongolia. Meanwhile traders 
from Western Asia, the Iranian Sog-
Buddhist sage in Mongolia.

Great Buddha of Bamyan (Afghanistan), before and after its destruction by the Taliban in 2001.

thusiastic explorers, archaeologists 
and art experts from a variety of na-
tions revealed to the world in gen-
eral the remarkable cultural, literary 
and artistic treasures of the peoples 
of Central Asia.  
But then ideological fanaticisms 
and political turmoil made Central 
dian merchants, brought Nesto-
rian Christianity and Manichaeism 
across Central Asia to eastern 
Turkistan and northern China. In 
Islamic times, the new faith of Mu-
hammad was carried from the Ira-
nian lands into the steppes and be-
yond, often involving a process of 
(•••)

Asia a region largely closed to the 
outside world for many decades. 
One consequence of this was 
that no academic body or institu-
tion, let alone a single scholar or 
small group of scholars, felt able 
to undertake the compilation of a 
general history of the region, from 
its prehistoric beginnings to its 
present place in world history, until 
UNESCO brought together a wide 
range of authorities in the 1980s 
and the present history was thus 
launched, mobilizing some 180 au-
thors.  Recently we have witnessed 
the emergence of the four Central 
Asian republics which are Turkic in 
ethnos and speech (Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uz-
bekistan) and the one which is their 
Iranian equivalent (Tajikistan). In-
dependent since the early 1990s, 
these states are now able to exploit 
their own mineral and other re-
sources and to play decisive roles 
in world commerce and industry; 
on the other hand they are now dis-
covering continuities of culture with 
lands on their periphery, such as 
the Turkish and Azerbaijan repub-
lics, the Islamic Republic of Iran and 
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, 
links which were previously strongly 
discouraged or even rendered im-
possible. 
It is hoped that this UNESCO His-
tory will demonstrate that what was 
once considered as an amorphous, 
little-known region of the European-
Asian landmass has in fact acquired 
an identity over recent centuries 
and is now fully able to play a part 
in world affairs. 
c. edmund Bosworth 
British historian, Emeritus 
Professor of Arabic Studies, 
University of Manchester, 
co-director with M.C. Asimov 
of Volume IV of the 
History of Civilizations of Central AsiaSpring celebrations (Nowruz) in Tadjikistan. 
