T
Class, caste 
and power
     by Ambalal Somabhai Patel
he basic cause of poverty in developing countries is usually 
considered to be the economic backwardness or stagnation 
of the rural areas where the vast majority of the population 
live. In India the main occupation of these rural people is ag-
riculture, which contributes almost 40% to the net domestic 
product. Yet the income of agricultural workers is substan-
tially below the national average, and is often almost at sub-
sistence level.
There are a number of reasons for this, notably:
• the unviable size of land holdings (still decreasing as a 
result of the system of dividing property among many);
• lack of irrigation facilities, so that farmers are dependent 
on rainfall and the vagaries of nature;
• lack of sufficient financial resource to invest in seeds, ma-
nure or equipment, or to pay seasonal labour costs;
• lack of satisfactory administrative machinery, such as co-
operatives, to organize the purchase and resale of agricul-
tural produce; 
• lack of transport facilities and a good road network to en-
sure rapid distribution of fresh vegetables and fruit;
• inadequate knowledge of farming, farm products and sea-
sonal crops, through non-utilization of available facilities such 
as further education programmes.
The productivity of small farms is generally low, resulting in 
very poor returns on labour input and capital investment. The 
plight of small farmers and unskilled agricultural labourers is 
made worse by the fact that they are ill-equipped for alter-
native employment in related sectors which could provide a 
source of income during the slack season. 
While economic stagnation results from external factors that 
can be altered by determined implementation of appropriate 
development policies and programmes, there are other so-
cial or sociological factors, which are deeply rooted in tradition 
and are woven into the fabric of Indian society. Big efforts by the 
education system and media are needed to overcome these ob-
stacles, which arise from caste distinctions and religious beliefs. 
The rigid hierarchy of the caste system and the specific functions 
assigned to each caste since ancient times, underpinned by re-
ligious injunctions, provide little scope for upward mobility. Rural 
people are also more conservative and traditional in their outlook 
and believe so strongly in religious practises, social customs and 
superstitions that they resist attempts to change social behaviour 
and attitudes. The weight of past traditions, customs and values 
acts as a brake on economic development and the rapid elimina-
tion of poverty. 
Another social mechanism, exploitation, is a natural conse-
quence of the class, caste and power systems, and plays an 
important role in perpetuating economic, social and political in-
equalities. The rich exploit the poor in subtle ways, of which the 
latter may be unaware; employers exploit employees; engineers 
exploit contractors or builders; the upper classes or castes ex-
ploit the lower; school administrators exploit teachers; teachers 
exploit students (although sometimes the reverse is the case); 
doctors and lawyers exploit patients and clients; intellectuals ex-
ploit non-intellectuals and create problems of student unrest.
Among other factors which affect the economic well-being of a 
society are family composition and size, which influence not only 
the intellectual and personal characteristics of family members, 
but also affect the family’s financial status and the benefits de-
rived from it. Two families differing in size and age structure may 
derive very different benefits from an equal total income. On the 
other hand, two families of equal size may have unequal earn-
ing capacities because of differences in age, sex, intellectual and 
personality traits, social or job status, or the number of aged, in-
firm or young family members. 
Since the poor are usually unemployed, unemployment is often 
regarded as a cause of poverty. It should rather be seen as a 
contributing factor, or as a consequence of other variables which 
may co-exist with poverty. 
Demographic factors have been raised in discussions of poverty 
because the population parameter appears in the measurements 
of wealth in terms of per capita national income. One conclusion 
drawn from this is that, in order to reduce poverty, the numerator 
(national income) should increase, while the denominator (popu-
lation size) should be reduced. At one time the population factor 
was relegated to the background – Karl Marx, for example, saw 
no link between demographic growth and poverty and held the 
capitalist system entirely responsible for the latter. In the 1950s 
and 1960s many developing countries experienced a population 
explosion as the result of a rapid decline in mortality rates unac-
companied by a corresponding fall in the birth rate. This again 
brought the population factor to the forefront. However, to imply 
that rapid population growth is the cause or even one of the main 
causes of the problem of poverty is clearly an oversimplification 
of the problem. 
(The UNESCO Courier, 1987 - 1)
Ambalal Somabhai Patel, Indian specialist in experimental  
and social psychology, was, in 1987, director of the Psycho-Clinic  
and Psycho-Assessment Services, Baroda, Gujarat, India,  
and editor of the Indian Journal of Psychology,  
the official organ of the Indian Psychological Association.
Tea cultivation is a vital industry in the region of Assam. In the 1970s small 
scale tea cultivators with farms smaller than one hectare began growing tea. 
Cultivation on small farms increased during the 1990s and today accounts  
for over 10% of the tea produced in Assam.
