World Heritage Sites and Biosphere Reserves  
— 85 sites in common
Fraser Island, a World Heritage Site, is the core part of the Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve.

World Heritage sites and bio-
sphere reserves share a num-
ber of common challenges – 
such as climate change and the 
worldwide loss and degradation of ser-
vices provided by ecosystems, notably 
those related to preserving biodiversity. 
To respond to these common challeng-
es, strategic coordination of activities 
of the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) 
Programme and the World Heritage 
Convention is needed for better man-
agement of some 85 sites that are both 
biosphere reserves and World Heritage 
sites. This process must combine the 
different mechanisms and approaches 
 offered by the two instruments, and use 
them as complementary tools for the 
benefit of both the environment and lo-
cal populations.
The main differences between biosphere 
reserves and World Heritage sites (in-
cluding natural, cultural or mixed sites 
and cultural landscapes) are their objec-
tives, legal status and management prin-
ciples. During the first years of biosphere 
reserve designations, the traditional con-
ception of national parks weighed heav-
ily. In a majority of cases, therefore, these 
old designations (from the 1970s and 
early 1980s) involve sites that do not re-
ally fulfil the three functions of biosphere 
reserves (the conservation, development 
and logistic functions including research, 
and monitoring and education) nor have 
the proper zonation scheme (i.e. core, 
buffer and transition areas) or coopera-
tive management structures. In these 
cases, biosphere reserves coincide with 
the respective natural World Heritage 
sites (such as Dja in Cameroon, Yellow-
stone in the United States and Macqua-
rie Island in Australia). 
However, in the majority of sites with 
twin designations, and particularly since 
1995, the World Heritage site repre-
sents the core area or a part of the core 
area of the respective biosphere reserve. 
An example is the Pantanal Biosphere 
Reserve in Brazil. Indeed, the Pantanal 
Conservation Complex, a natural World 
Heritage site, represents one of the 15 
core areas of the biosphere reserve. But 
biosphere reserves can include not only 
natural heritage sites, but also cultural 
heritage sites. Like the Pays de Fon-
tainebleau Biosphere Reserve in France 
and Tonle Sap in Cambodia. As for El 
Vizcaino Biosphere Reserve in Mexico, 
two sites – one natural and one cul-
tural – are part of the same biosphere 
reserve. 
Ana Persić 
Division of Ecological 
and Earth Sciences (UNESCO)
Excerpts from the article “World Heritage Sites and 
Biosphere Reserves - Building on complementarities”, 
World Heritage Review, n° 49 – April 2008
