
Children dressed in India’s Flag colors.
he democratic ideal has never been fully translated into prac-
tise. Many so-called democratic societies in the past were 
hijacked and became oligarchies in which democratic rhet-
oric was used to preserve the fiction that the ruling group 
represented the majority. The Greek city states, for example, 
are often cited as the first democracies, but it is convenient-
ly forgotten that, in them, slaves outnumbered free citizens 
and were neither represented nor had any rights. In the light 
of historical experience, how can democracy be adapted to 
the circumstances of the late twentieth century?
In modern times democracy has often been associated 
with the nation-state. But perhaps we should not overlook 
the experience of the smaller social and political unites 
which in the past have been run on quasi-democratic lines. 
Those who sought to endow the nation-state with an 
identity by associating it with the middle class or with a re-
gional, linguistic, ethnic or even religious group, claimed to 
be doing so in the name of democracy. Sometimes, it has 
been argued, these communities were fictitious and their 
ostensible identity camouflaged hidden aspirations. By 
equating the group’s identity with nationalism, national and 
democratic causes coalesced. But in these nation-states 
the functioning of democracy was limited by the national-
ism with which they were linked. Now that the nation-state 
is increasingly being questioned, should we also question 
democracy – or certain kinds of democracy?
One question that might be asked is whether democracy 
presupposes secularism. In many parts of the world, reli-
Romila thapar is professor emeritus of History at Jawaharlal Nehru  
University in New Delhi, and one of the world’s foremost experts 
of ancient Indian history. Her seminal work, ‘History of India, Vol.1’  
has been in print ever since it was first published in 1966. Dr. Thapar,  
who believes in interpreting ancient Indian texts in the light of new  
insights, has taught at top institutions including Oxford University, Cornell, 
the College de France in Paris, and the University of London.  
She has been involved in her country’s debates about historical truth,  
political identity and social reform.


An Elusive Ideal    
                                         by Romila Thapar 
gion is now being politically manipulated on an unprece-
dented scale. In saying this I am not objecting to people’s 
right to practise their faith, but to the way in which various 
politicians and fundamentalists have distorted this right. If 
questioning the public function of religion necessarily leads 
to secularism, then this could encourage the promotion of 
another approach to democracy, particularly in societies 
where several religions exist side by side. 
Democracy implies both representation and decisions 
based on the views of the majority. But what constitutes 
a majority? If it is simply a matter of the number of votes 
cast at elections, this opens the ways to vote-rigging or to 
the mobilization of mass support by ideologies that appear 
to espouse a variety of causes but in reality are no more 
than a mechanism for attracting and controlling large num-
bers of people. I am thinking here of the kind of reactionary 
populism based on race or religion that has time and again 
caused tensions and violence in many parts of the world, 
both North and South. In the interests of true democracy, it 

would be worth considering how such movements can be 
prevented from imposing their definition of majority rule, es-
pecially when religious communities are exploited politically 
as part of a supra-national hidden agenda. 
The modern nation-state also faces the problem of ac-
commodating minority cultures, which are increasingly 
aware that they cannot be excluded from the democrat-
ic majority. This problem is likely to become especial-
ly acute in the industrialized countries, where sharply 
differing groups have forcibly been brought together 
through past colonial connections and present eco-
nomic needs, and where a numerical majority is some-
times reduced to the status of a political minority. In 
ex-colonies where such conflicts are also known, the 
divergent groups do, at least, normally share some com-
mon inheritance and history. 
The best way to understand the correlation between cul-
ture and democracy is to examine the manner in which in-
dividuals or groups choose their identity and perceive the 
difference between themselves and others. In part, this 
is the result of early socialization. It can also spring from 
tension and conflicts, which sharpen people’s perception 
of their identity. Why, incidentally, should the nation-state 
insist on a single identity? After all, individuals have mul-
tiple identities. The sterility of a single identity could be 
replaced by a multi-faceted one involving more complex 
social and cultural patterns. A multi-faceted democracy 
would also be more difficult to control politically. 
Representational democracy often ends up with power 
far removed from the individual citizen. Now that cine-
ma, television and advertising have all got into the act, 
would-be representatives of the people find themselves 
addressing audiences they cannot even see. True repre-
sentativity must be based on some reference back to the 
electors, who must also retain the right to recall their rep-
resentatives, if they so wish. These seemingly negative 
“Even in democratic societies, when children are taught their rights and duties, attention is rarely drawn to their right to disagree.” Elections in a Chilean school. 

rights can provide an essential corrective to the tendency of 
representatives to turn into power-brokers. 
The collapse of some socialist economies has led the peoples 
in the countries concerned to a desperate hope that the free 
market will protect them against the revival of totalitarian 
regimes. But the experience of other countries shows that 
the market cannot do this. Unfortunately, the market can 
equally well lend itself to other kinds of dictatorial demand 
– from consumerism, the armaments industry, multi-national 
corporations and other interests. Such demands, which un-
dermine equality of opportunity and social justice, can only 
be countered by an equitable economic system and a legal 
system that is accessible to all citizens and prevents the ero-
sion of human rights and the annulling of human dignity. 
However, any system can be thwarted, abused or rendered 
ineffective if those who control it cannot be challenged. In-
stitutions which are expected to act as watchdogs often end 
up by becoming a party to the abuses they are supposed to 
prevent. The articulation of dissent and protest is impera-
tive for democratic systems. Even in democratic societies, 
when children are taught their rights and duties, attention 
is rarely drawn to their right to disagree. Conformity is at 
a premium, and dissent is frowned upon or ignored. The 
submissive subject, rather than the autonomous individual, 
is regarded as the ideal citizen. 
In pleading the case of the autonomous individual, I am 
not advocating an anarchic society. Autonomous individu-
als do not set out to destroy society; they are concerned 
with changing it in creative ways. They do not necessarily 
form part of the power structure themselves, but they com-
ment on it and, if needs be, protest against specific actions 
taken by those in power. As long as it is accepted that 
there is room for moral authority as well as political and 
social authority in the running of society, such people will 
always have a place in the democratic process. 
(The UNESCO Courier, 1992 - 11) 
