Sagarmatha national park, Pattar glacier (Nepal).

We must respond to climate change today
the climate is changing — faster than ever. since the beginning of time, earth’s climate has been changing. 
from warm periods to cold, life has had to adapt and evolve. but now human activities are having an effect  
on the dynamics of the planet itself. and most alarmingly the pace of change has dramatically altered,  
threatening to push many plant and animal species towards extinction.
y burning fossil fuels we have added to natural emissions 
of greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the Earth’s atmo-
sphere. As a result, the concentration of such gases in the 
atmosphere is well above the level at any point in the last 
800,000 years. Inevitably, temperatures are now rising too. 
In 2007 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
published its latest scientific report, showing that the glob-
al average temperature increased over the past century by 
0.74°C. In the Arctic, the average temperature over land has 
increased by up to 5°C over the same period and there is 
now a strong chance that the North Pole will be ice free in the 
summer in the next two to three decades. 
Glaciers are melting more rapidly than expected, acceler-
ating the rise of sea levels and increasing meltwater floods 
and unseasonal water shortages in some of the most densely 
populated parts of the world. 
It’s also clear that even if we could stop human-related emis-
sions tomorrow, the massive amount of greenhouse gases 
that we’ve already pumped into the atmosphere will cause 
further warming of between a half and one degree.
We can already see what a one degree centigrade rise in 
global temperature above pre-industrial levels looks like. And 
we can anticipate what a two degree increase in temperature 
would bring: changes in the way that plants grow, where ani-
mals migrate and the way the ecosystems function.
But a world with a three degrees temperature rise could look 
very different. Increased floods, storms and droughts would 
severely impact the way that we live — our access to water 
and food, and the security of our energy supplies. 
By the time we get to a 4°C increase, the rise in tempera-
tures could destroy the very fabric of our societies. Some ar-
eas that are currently habitable might be unable to support 
human societies, let alone accommodate the numbers that 
we anticipate on the planet in the next 20 to 30 years.
And we don’t even talk about a world where average tem-
peratures rise by five degrees or more.
The explosion of modern life has been built around seem-
ingly unlimited supplies of coal, oil and gas, powering indus-
tries to meet relentlessly growing demand. The assumption all 
along has been that our natural environment has the capacity 
By Jacqueline McGlade

to provide endless supplies of fuels and accommodate ever 
more by-products of energy generation. 
In reality, of course, burning fossil fuels to drive our econo-
mies has generated the greenhouse gas emissions that are 
now causing global warming. 
Producing and consuming energy accounts for 70% of 
mankind’s carbon dioxide emissions. And half of these emis-
sions are generated by China, the USA and European Union 
countries. 
Energy demand in emerging economies, which include Chi-
na, India, Brazil and Indonesia, is expected to grow rapidly, 
perhaps doubling in the next few decades.
If we choose to continue burning fossil fuels until supplies 
are exhausted, we will simply increase the amount of green-
house gases in the atmosphere and experience even more 
global warming.
 
Energy efficiency
But there is an alternative. Shifting to a new paradigm of en-
ergy generation and use, based on renewable sources and 
energy efficiency, would allow us to avoid many of the prob-
lems of a warmer world.
Currently, both industries and households waste a great 
deal of the energy we produce. In the fight against climate 
change, this is an obvious place to start because greater en-
ergy efficiency doesn’t just cut greenhouse gas emissions — 
it actually saves us money. The International Energy Agency, 
for example, estimates that every $1 spent on energy saving 
measures avoids more than $2 investing in producing en-
ergy.
Small actions in individual households, such as shifting to 
more efficient household appliances, can have a huge effect 
when aggregated across the whole of society. 
It’s estimated, for instance, that the ban on incandescent 
light bulbs in the European Union, which comes into effect 
in coming years, will produce financial savings of US$ 5–10 
billion each year and energy savings equivalent to Romania’s 
annual electricity consumption.
Similarly, many places in America have local bans on drying 
clothes outside on lines, which compels people to use elec-
tric dryers. The energy needs of these dryers are estimated 
to be equivalent to that produced by 15 nuclear power sta-
tions. 
So actions to decrease energy demand are obviously cru-
cial because they have an immediate effect on greenhouse 
gas emissions from power plants. But this is just one part of 
the puzzle. We will still need to generate significant amounts 
of energy, not least because demand in the developing world 
is expected to rise rapidly. In meeting this demand, we must 
shift away from our dependence on fossil fuels and focus 
instead on renewables. 
The EU is halfway to its goal of meeting 20% of its en-
ergy needs from renewable sources, such as wind and solar 
power, by 2020, but there is huge variation in the accom-
plishments of individual countries. The frontrunner, Sweden, 
already generates more than 40% of its energy from renew-
ables — an example of what can be achieved with the right 
ambitions and policies.
A broad perspective on costs and benefits
To keep climate change within manageable limits, we need 
to limit average temperature change to two degrees or less. 
In practice, that means that by 2050 we will need to have 
cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% compared to 
1990 levels. For industrialised countries, whose per capita 
greenhouse gas emissions still hugely exceed those else-
where, the reduction will need to be more like 80%. 
Energy efficiency and renewable energy obviously both 
Wind turbine, Santiago, Cape Verde. 

have a crucial role to play. It’s important to stress, however, 
that there are different possibilities for reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions and we shouldn’t just focus on identifying 
the cheapest approaches without considering their full im-
pact. Doing most with our scarce resources demands that 
we avoid solutions to one problem that create new problems 
elsewhere. 
The benefits of some renewable energy sources, for exam-
ple, can be offset by the pollution they cause or their impact 
on water resources.  Some measures to combat air pollution 
will help reduce global warming, some will exacerbate it. 
Rather than generating externalised costs, we need to tar-
get measures that produce ‘win-wins’ wherever possible.
Achieving the needed changes in the ways we generate and 
use energy will obviously require efforts from across society. 
The decisions of businesses and consumers are ultimately 
going to determine the fate of our environment. But govern-
ments have a particularly important role in creating the incen-
tives that guide those decisions.
A crucial element here is the price signals that we all face 
as producers or consumers. In market economies, we rely on 
prices to guide our purchasing decisions. All too often, how-
ever, market prices present a distorted image of the costs 
of production — excluding, for instance, costs imposed on 
society today or in the future as a result of pollution, climate 
change and so on. 
Right now, fossil fuel prices often reflect the cost of extrac-
tion and distribution but fall far short of representing the full 
burden on the environment. Correcting these deficiencies 
using mechanisms such as green taxation would significantly 
increase the incentive for firms and individuals to invest in ef-
ficiency and renewable energy. 
The challenge is considerable and will require efforts from 
all sectors and all countries. It’s crucial, though, that we don’t 
delay action while we debate the allocation of responsibilities 
because doing so will only make the goal harder to achieve.
IEA reckons that every year we delay shifting to low- 
carbon energy will add an extra $500 billion to the total cost 
of achieving the two degree target. A few years of delay could 
make the target unreachable.  
Quite clearly, therefore, the costs of delay far exceed those 
of action. So the message is simple: we need to act now.
Solar power station in Themis (France).

Jacqueline m. mcglade is director of the European Environment Agency. 
She is a leading marine biologist and environmental informatics professor 
of the University of London.
