                                       Last May, fraser Island, Australian World Heritage site since 1992, 
                               became the core part of the new Great Sandy Biosphere Reserve. 
                Natural world heritage sites conserve ecosystems for which they have been inscribed, 
       while biosphere reserves also do restoration of degraded environments. 
How will environment and tourist management practices change for the world’s largest sand island?
Off the eastern coast of Australia, 
Fraser is the largest sand island 
in the world. It supports a com-
plex rainforest ecosystem, unique 
perched freshwater lakes and rare 
Australian flora and fauna. 
The island, which recently became 
the core part of the Great Sandy 
Biosphere Reserve, was inscribed 
on the UNESCO World Heritage 
List in 1992 and much of its land is 
protected by national park laws. “In 
some rare cases, core zones can 
be inhabited. In the case of Fraser 
Island, the villages are very small 
and only at the coast line,” explains 
UNESCO’s Ecological Sciences 
and Biodiversity Section chief, Dr 
Thomas Schaaf. 
How will Great Sandy’s joining 
UNESCO’s World Network of Bio-
sphere Reserves alter the manage-
ment practices already in place on 
Fraser Island for the environment 
and tourism? 
According to Schaaf, “Natural 
world heritage sites conserve natu-
ral ecosystems for which they have 
been inscribed, while biosphere 
reserves also do environmental res-
toration and rehabilitation activities 
of degraded environments. In fact, 
biosphere reserves are mainly con-
When World Heritage sites  
and Biosphere Reserves merge   

Fraser Island, Australia, is the largest sand island in the world.

cerned with managing change in 
ecosystems linked to human activ-
ity in order to promote sustainable 
development.” 
Management of natural World 
Heritage sites also takes sustain-
able development into account, 
particularly for tourism. According 
to Kishore Rao, Word Heritage 
Centre Deputy Director, “The most 
important factor and management 
challenge is to ensure that such 
use is compatible with and has no 
negative impact on the ‘outstand-
ing universal values’ for which the 
sites were inscribed on the World 
Heritage List.” 
This is not the first time a World 
Heritage site has also become or 
been incorporated into a Biosphere 
Reserve. “As is the case with 
Serengeti National Park in Tanza-
nia – named a World Heritage site 
and a Biosphere Reserve in 1981 – 
the two can go together. The mag-
nificent wildlife array is outstanding, 
but the Serengeti is also a typical 
savanna ecosystem in Eastern 
Africa,” he said.
Changing lifestyles
Russel Burnett, chairman of the Bur-
nett Mary Regional Group (BMRG) 
that presented Great Sandy’s ap-
plication to UNESCO, said that 
one of his organization’s main goals 
in having the area designated a bio-
sphere reserve was to establish its 
importance to the integrity of a world 
heritage site, thus contributing to its 
conservation. “It is not well known 
that many of Fraser Island’s attrac-
tions can actually be seen without 
the need to drive bumpy four-wheel 
drive tracks or catch a boat,” said 
Stewart. “There is a great poten-
tial to develop eco-tourism on the 
mainland.” 

To get to Fraser Island you have to take a boat and then hire a 4x4.
Fraser supports rare Australian flora and fauna.

Although the Great Sandy region 
already plays host to 950,000 sea-
sonal visitors per year – compared 
with less than 200,000 permanent 
residents – the BMRG chairman 
was less concerned with the im-
pacts of increased tourist numbers 
to the area than the vast number of 
people moving to the region to live. 
“The ‘seachange’ phenomenon, 
whereby people are moving to 
coastal areas of Australia, is caus-
ing very rapid growth in population 
in the Great Sandy Region, with 
significant urban development,” he 
said. “The loss of natural areas of 
conservation, development of good 
agricultural land and increased hu-
man impacts on popular recreation-
al areas are all potential threats to 
the region’s environment.” Manag-
ing Great Sandy as a biosphere will 
help to plan this development in a 
more sustainable way, he believes. 
“In fact, we call Biosphere Re-
serves learning sites for sustain-
able development”, said Dr Schaaf. 
“In addition, Biosphere Reserves 
are also scientific research sites 
to study the structure, functioning 
and dynamics of ecosystems, and 
the interactions between people 
and the environment — of interest to 
both natural and social scientists.” 
Letea Cavander, 
Australian journalist 
