The town of Blieskastel, part of Bliesgau Biosphere Reserve.

                                     the concept of urban ecology is key for the bliesgau, protected area 
               in germany added to the global network of unesCo biosphere reserves on 26 May. 
         the bliesgau is not the first site to include its urban elements, but it is the only one 
                           where population density is as high as 310 inhabitants per square kilometre.
Man and  
the bIosphere:
applyIng  
the concept 
lIterally
who introduced wine to Saarland 
- the start of a long tradition. Wine 
was cultivated in the valley of the 
River Blies right up to the first half 
of the 20th century. 
“Bliesgau” is the name of the 370 
square kilometre region bordering 
on the River Saar in the west, the 
Rhineland Palatinate in the East, 
and France to the south. Travel bro-
chures talk enthusiastically of “Med-
iterranean climate” “rolling hills” 
and “wide orchard meadows”. The 
shell limestone soil makes Bliesgau 
unique, and numerous species of 
orchids thrive on it. 
It is not an untouched natural idyll, 
however. Humans have shaped the 
region. The Bliesgau Biosphere Re-
serve thus contains 111,000 peo-
ple, divided between two towns, St. 
Ingbert and Bieskastel. The popu-
lation density of 310 residents per 
square metre is above the Federal 
German average and also higher 
than in any other biosphere. 
With regard to nature conserva-
tion, Bliesgau is nothing special 
compared with other biospheres. 
Measures to protect fauna and flora 
mall, but significant. That’s Saar-
land. If you discount the “city states” 
of Hamburg, Berlin und Bremen, it’s 
Germany’s smallest Federal State. 
Slightly withdrawn in the south-west 
of the republic, it gives the impres-
sion of being a small appendage of 
the great German state. France is 
its majestic neighbour to the south, 
and a small snout noses Luxem-
bourg in the west, but apart from 
that it’s completely surrounded by 
the large state of Rhineland-Palat-
inate. 
At the same time, it’s one of the 
warmest corners of Germany, so 
it’s not surprising, then, that people 
have settled here for thousands of 
years, leaving their traces behind 
them. The Gollenstein, a 4000-year-
old menhir, bears witness to the 
fact that the region was occupied 
as early as the Middle Paleolithic 
age. 
Later on, the Romans led a good 
life in Saarland. Julius Caesar origi-
nally conquered the land from the 
Celts, and it was the Romans, too, 
(•••)
Part of the central area of the Bliesgau Biosphere Reserve (Germany).

were taken long ago. Parts of the 
region are nature reserves: 43% of 
the territory corresponded to pro-
tected land even before the site 
was added to UNESCO’s World 
Network of Biosphere Reserves. 
“But urban natural conservation is 
also a project we are working on,” 
add Detlev Reinhard and Holger 
Zeck, employees at the Ministry 
of the Environment. A number of 
the species recorded at Bliesgau 
actually live in the towns, such as 
the crested lark, wall lizard, greater 
mouse-eared bat, barn owl and 
common swift. These animals are 
part of the reserve. “We want to 
systematically assess how nature is 
developing in urban centres”, Rein-
hard and Zeck say. “What is impor-
tant to observe is how species that 
have moved to the towns change 
their habits and become dependent 
on urban infrastructure, for instance 
for food.”
How is Bliesgau 
unique?
The urban ecology concept is key 
for this biosphere reserve. For Re-
inhard and Zeck, “It’s the vibrant 
diversity that makes the Bliesgau 
so unique. Meadows, valleys and 
forests shaped the landscape, but, 
above all, it was the coexistence of 
man and nature, and the close in-
tegration with urban regions that 
made this stretch of countryside so 
special.” 
“The situation here can’t be com-
pared with other biosphere re-
serves”, explains Pia Schramm of the 
Biosphere Association in Blieskas-
tel. “Many biosphere reserves are 
very much geared to classical na-
ture conservation and regional de-
velopment; and rely strongly, for ex-
ample, on the marketing of regional 
products,” Schramm says. ”We 
wanted, in addition, to show what 
it means to attain sustainability in 
urban systems, too”.
Urban ecology
St. Ingbert, the town in the north 
of Bliesgau with a population of 
40,000, is the model for the close 
link between town and countryside. 
“In St. Ingbert we started to think about 
biospheres very early on,” explained 
Monika Conrad, responsible for the 
environment and biosphere section of 
the Town Development Office. Their 
citizens were extremely active on the 
climate protection front, Conrad said. 
“There is a solar initiative which offers 
assistance to citizens installing solar 
equipment on their roofs.” And a solar 
cooperative, whereby citizens who do 
not have an available roof of their own 
can buy shares in the company that 
equips public buildings. This provides 
yearly income and added motivation 
to get involved in such projects. 
Another example: an area of indus-
trial waste land in the town has been 
listed as a model trading estate in line 
with sustainable urban development. 
A block heat and power plant supplies 
the estate with heat; the biomass for it 
comes from the town’s compost plant, 
as well as ligneous lopping from Blies-
gau. This supplies heat to resident 
firms, as well as the adjacent commu-
nity building and the town hall. 
In addition, the public transportation 
bus system has been greatly expand-
ed, to make it possible for schoolchil-
dren in the region to get to school in 
St Ingbert, and for farmers to reach 
sales outlets for their produce in sur-
rounding towns. 
For those in charge of Bliesgau’s con-
servation project, sustainability means 
not just ecological, but economic and 
social sustainability as well. 
Jens Lubbadeh, 
journalist for Der Spiegel Online 
(Germany), correspondant 
for the UNESCO Courier
Man and the bIosphere: applyIng the concept lIterally
(•••)
In Bliesgau, various educational activities and awareness campaigns encourage  
sustainable development.
