O
India:  
Cycles of Birth and Rebirth      
   by A.S. Gnanasambandan
nce up on a time a snarling dog was standing outside an 
Indian temple. Another dog came up to him and asked why 
he was so angry. The first dog replied: “I was a priest in this 
temple in my previous birth. The trustee of the temple, a power-
ful man, goaded me into becoming his accomplice in the theft 
of the jewellery of the goddess of the temple, and as a result I 
am now born as a dog. I am waiting to see that fellow. As soon 
I see him, I shall pounce on him and tear out his throat. The 
second dog said: “Please don’t do that. I was that trustee in 
my previous birth.”
This story and others like it were often told by Indian sages to 
illustrate the belief, common to all schools of Indian philosophy, 
that life is a cycle of births and rebirths. After their death, hu-
man beings are reborn into this world in various forms; all of 
them have passed through several earlier births and will pass 
through several future births. What they think and do in this life 
will determine the form (human, animal, insect, etc.) in which 
A leading Tamil writer and literary scholar,  
A.S. Gnanasambandan (1916-2002)  
penned over 30 books on literature and spiritualism. 
This article is an edited version of a longer study prepared for  
The UNESCO Courier by Professor Gnanasambandan. 
they will live their next life, as set forth in the doctrine of Karma 
(action) and rebirth. “Accordingly as one acts, accordingly as 
one behaves, so does one become in the next life,” says the an-
cient treatise known as the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. “The 
doer of good becomes good, the doer of evil becomes evil. 
One becomes virtuous by virtuous action, bad by bad action.”
What happens to the soul after death and before rebirth? 
Each school of Indian philosophy has its own answer to this 
question, although they all agree that there is a celestial world 
and that those who do right things and live a godly life go to 
it and enjoy its benefits while awaiting their return to the ter-
restrial world. 
Cremation at dawn on the shores of the Ganges, in Northern India. © Claude Gourlay, Pont-Aven

Because there are differences in the amount and quality of 
good and evil that people do, the upper world is divided into 
seven regions or lokas; the underworld where evildoers go is 
also divided into regions. The doers of good go to one of the 
seven different upper worlds depending on the quality and 
quantity of the good they do. The lowest upper world, for 
example, is reached by those who do good and lead a pious 
life, performing the prescribed rituals to propitiate the gods, 
but do not control their senses and mind. To go to a higher 
upper world one must control one’s sense and one’s mind, 
and as far as possible one’s inner mind also. 
Only a human being can achieve emancipation (moksha) 
from the cycle of birth and death. This fate is reserved for the 
amount of desire – even desire for emancipation – remains 
in his mind. 
“Eradicate desire,” wrote the southern sage Tirumoolar. 
“Eradicate it even if the desire is to attain the lotus feet of 
the Lord.
The more you desire the greater will be your suffering.”
Some believe that the life which goes out of the body has 
a form, the sukshma sarira or astral body, with which we 
accede to the upper world or lower world according to the 
good or bad that we have done in this one. Another belief 
is that a dying person’s last thought gives an indication as 
to their next birth. This is why Indian philosophy stresses 
that you should go to bed with pure thoughts, repeating 
select few (jnanis or yogis) who are unaffected by worldly 
things or by the pairs of opposites (dwandas) such as suf-
fering and happiness. According to the Bhagavad Gita: “The 
serene one absorbed in the Atman [eternal self] masters 
his will, He knows no disquiet in heat or in cold, In pain of 
pleasure, In honour, or dishonour.” Only someone who tran-
scends the pairs of opposites attains the lotus feet of the 
Lord. 
Even if a person’s soul reaches the seventh upper world 
it is still not entitled to achieve emancipation if a very small 
the name of the Lord. If you die in your sleep, the purity of 
your last thought will ennoble your soul through the next birth 
which will certainly be into a higher spiritual life.
How far have these philosophical tenets and beliefs been 
practised in society? Traditional Indian society was broadly 
divided into a minority of intellectuals and philosophers and 
a majority which fully accepted their teachings about the cy-
cle of birth and death. Even today, illiterate villagers say that 
someone who harms another person will be born as a street 
dog in his next birth.
A painting of the Wheel of Life, one of the most ancient Buddhist symbols. 
Gripped by the claws of Yama, the Lord of Death, the image depicts  
the six worlds of potential rebirth.

The doctrine of Karma and rebirth has long influenced 
people to do what would lead them to a good afterlife. It 
might be said that they were motivated by a foolish fear of 
the other world, which may or may not exist. But what about 
the postulates of modern science regarding the atom, elec-
tromagnetic force and energy, which cannot be perceived 
by our senses, but whose existence we accept because we 
can see the results of their actions?
There is however one big difference between the findings 
of modern science and the Indian “life chain” philosophy. The 
Darwinian theory of evolution postulates that life can only 
evolve upwards, whereas according to Indian philosophy, 
those who have reached a very high spiritual level can come 
However, as the centuries went by, an intellectual hierarchy 
began to rule society and its members realized that they could 
use the doctrine of Karma and rebirth as a weapon to sub-
jugate the majority and thereby perpetuate their power. The 
caste system came to be twisted into an inegalitarian hi-
erarchy based on birth. The higher castes in the hierarchy 
were meant to serve them. Since the majority of the lower 
rank were deliberately left without education and intellec-
tual pursuits they had to accept this inegalitarian structure 
based on birth, which determined what work they should 
do in this world. 
So, for many centuries, the theory of a chain of birth and 
rebirth helped perpetuate the inequalities and injustices of 
Untouchable woman and sacred cow (Pushkar).

down in the next birth to the lowest level if they commit an 
action in a fit of emotion or anger. There is no guarantee that 
people will always rise from one birth to the next. Their next 
birth is decided by their thoughts and actions in the previous 
one and by the Karma that they have already accumulated. 
This deeply rooted faith in the life chain has shaped Indian 
society from time immemorial. As an explanation of why some 
are more talented and enjoy higher social status that others, 
and why some suffer while others enjoy good fortune in this 
life, it led people to accept what was inevitable and at the 
same time enjoy peace of mind. When people feel that they 
alone are the cause of the good and evil which befall them, 
they do not try to blame others for their situation. In the words 
of a Tamil poem written in the third century B.C.: “All places in 
the world are ours, all human beings are our kinsmen; good 
and bad which befall us are not inflicted by others.”
the caste system based on birth. Saint Tiruvalluvar’s dictum 
that all souls are born equal in this world could not exert 
much sway over the majority of people because they were 
denied the capacity to read it and understand it.
It is hard to know how far modern Indians believe in the doc-
trine of Karma and rebirth and how much they think about it. 
Modern Indian society is a competitive society in which the 
pursuit of wealth is accompanied by many pressures and 
evils. And yet the majority of people still have a wonderful way 
of keeping their peace of mind. Of someone who acquires 
wealth by wrongdoing they are inclined to say peacefully: “Let 
him earn, he is not going to carry anything he acquires now 
into his next birth. He has to go empty-handed.”
(The UNESCO Courier, 1998 – 3) 
