Using culture to reconstruct Haiti – is this 
“a challenge? an anomaly? or a threat?” to
paraphrase the expression used by the black
American historian Rayford Logan after the
unexpected emergence of the new nation-state
of Haiti in 1804. 
Neither anomaly nor threat, but certainly a
challenge, because after a historic two hundred
years of existence, with periods of advance and
regression, sometimes provoked from within,
sometimes from outside, the task in hand today,
since the 12 January 2010 disaster, is no less than a
radical rebirth of Haiti. And, after the hundreds of
thousands of deaths and innumerable collapsed
buildings, what is left that can serve as cradle for
this renaissance? What remains are Haiti’s cultural
resources. At the height of the American
occupation of Haiti, with a paternalistic but
welcome vehemence, Dr Jean Price Mars, writing
in his landmark book Ainsi parla l'Oncle, published
in 1928 [translated as So Spoke the Uncle in 1983],
reminded us that it is these resources that give life
to our country and enable it to survive.
The time has come to reaffirm that the end
goal of development is the happiness of the
people, and to recognize that culture is an
essential element in our country’s development.
Not an accessory or a luxury, accessible only to
the elite, but the very stuff that weaves society
together, gives it strength and helps foster
wellbeing, in tandem with the economy.



A hotbed of artistic activity, Haiti does not take
full advantage of its cultural resources to further
its development. The new cultural action plan,
aimed particularly at young people, calls for
raising awareness of vectors of creativity and
promoting them.
Culture, cradle of the
Haitian renaissance
by Marie-Laurence Jocelyn Lassègue

Jacmel carnival figure
symbolizing liberation
from slavery.

Plan of action for culture
Because of her conviction that culture can play a
major part in the process of renovation and
restructuring of Haiti, the Minister of Culture and
Communication has called for the integration of
four themes in the nation’s Plan of Action for
Reconstruction and Development – institutional
strengthening; economic development; identity,
citizenship and social cohesion; regional
integration and international cooperation.
Institutional strengthening implies the
establishment of partnership agreements
between various ministries, with a view to
encouraging the creation of infrastructures
around cultural goods and services, as well as
respecting specific heritage characteristics when
developing given sites.
The Minister is aware that the cultural and
creative industries can make a significant
contribution to our GDP, and this is why she
plans to set up a ‘creativity fund’ aimed at artists,
craftspeople and cultural enterprises, as well as
establishing a mechanism in favour of
professional training and the promotion of
cultural entrepreneurship, with the ultimate goal
of integrating cultural factors with economic
development. 
The sense of identity and citizenship needed
for social cohesion can only emerge when
knowledge and skills are valued and passed on
from generation to generation. It is therefore
necessary to create the right conditions for the
Haitian people to accept who they are and to
continue to renew and nourish their traditions.
Haitian culture derives its strength from
creativity (in art, theatre, dance, music, etc.). This
means that measures are needed, targeting
young people especially and in cooperation
with the Ministry of Education, to raise
awareness and to encourage vectors for
creativity.
Haitian creativity is responsible for a great
diversity of national culture, which is recognised
the world over, especially in the Caribbean.
There are many examples of Haitian culture’s
major influence in other countries in the region,
as part of a constant flow of exchanges. Today,
these exchanges need to be given extra
impetus, with a deliberate policy of regional
integration and international cooperation
through culture. A strengthened cultural
presence on the regional and international stage
will help to improve the image of our country
abroad, while reassuring our compatriots in the
diaspora, our international partners and
potential investors. 
An Observatory for Haitian culture
To encourage greater coherence in public
involvement in culture, the Ministry of Culture
intends to bring together national and
international artists and culture professionals, as
well as foreign friends and policy-makers, at a
national Forum on Haitian culture. This Forum
will provide an opportunity to meet and identify
the main priorities and lines of action. The
programme will be monitored and evaluated on
the basis of a series of indicators, data and
statistics, drawn up in cooperation with UNESCO. 
Given the nature of its mandate, the Organi -
zation can play a leading role in supporting Haiti
on its long path to renovation and reconstruction,
especially in the cultural and artistic fields.
I believe that the project for a Haitian Cultural
Observatory, to which we are particularly
attached, would constitute an ideal and
sustainable vehicle for developing this role. 
A militant feminist,  
Marie-Laurence Jocelyn
Lassègue was named Haiti’s
Minister of Culture and
Communication in November
2009. She held the position
previously from 1991 to 1993, after
having worked as a teacher and
journalist. From 2006 to November
2009, she was also Minister for
Women’s Affairs and Women’s
Rights.
It is therefore
necessary to
create the right
conditions for
the Haitian
people to accept
who they are
and to continue
to renew and
nourish their
traditions.
André Eugène, one of 
the Grand Rue sculptors, 
Port-au-Prince. J
