Let us forget the idea right from the start that
the Haitian people are defeated, resigned, or
helpless. Let us not see Haiti as a disaster victim.
The world can and must learn lessons from the
recent tragedy in this country of 10 million
inhabitants, and from its lengthy history, in order
to attempt the radical change that is needed
more than ever in the current international
context.
What is this context? Cut-backs and more
cut-backs. Rich nations heavily in debt.
Questionable, or non-existent, proposals for
getting out of the crisis. Flagrant inequalities in
wealthy societies. The socially excluded left by
the wayside. Unemployment, bankruptcies,
suicides, misery, questions of identity – these are
just a few of the most conspicuous symptoms of
the lack of options for the future.
The real difference between the richest and
the poorest nations – and it is considerable – lies
in the fact that the former have the material,
intellectual and structural resources to change
the situation. On condition that they want to.
Because what is manifestly missing is the
political will. And perhaps the capacity to muster
the forces. We have to accept that the world is
not functioning as it should and provide
ourselves with the means to make a radical
change.
Daily life in 
Port-au-Prince, 
January 2010.



The absence of vision is Haiti’s most serious
problem. The country has been receiving the
wrong kind of aid for so long. Yet the latest
tragedy could be a catalyst for national and
international energies.
A common
search for
greater
humanity
by 
Raoul Peck

An accumulation of failures
A radical change has to be made, considering the
failures that have characterized the last 60 years:
there has been the failure of most development
policies; the failure of structural adjustment,
which was supposed to improve the economies of
developing countries sustainably; the failure, so
far, of the UN in conflict situations; the failure of
the European Union as a counter to the financial
frenzy of capitalism; failure of the major
ideological blocs, unable to provide any response
beyond their hegemonic needs and interests;
failure of the non-aligned countries’ promises to
propose a viable alternative to the deadly
dichotomy of the Cold War; failure of the
international Left, and in particular social
democracy, which has been unable to
counterbalance global disequilibrium; and, finally,
the failure of the progressive Left in our
developing countries, so often cornered with their
backs against the wall, abandoned by their
Western allies, who are too preoccupied with their
own political survival.
This accumulation of failures makes me think that
the real way out, for Haiti, can only come from
itself. Why, yet again, should we trust this apparent
willingness to “aid” Haiti today? Why should we
adhere blindly to hastily-drafted scenarios, often
drawn up far from our shores? Several Haitian
organizations and movements have denounced
the procedure adopted to draft Haiti's “Action Plan
for Reconstruction and Development”, from which
Haitian social and civil stakeholders were almost
totally excluded. I add my voice to theirs,
deploring this forced march, which does not allow
us to play an active role in reshaping our country.
Turn the current paradigm around
What we are calling for is a little more humility
and self-criticism. In an article dated 20 March
2010, Jonathan Katz (Associated Press) wrote
that, on 10 March, former U.S. President Bill
Former Haitian Minister of Culture (1995-1997),  Raoul Peck is also a film-
maker, author of L’homme sur les quais, Lumumba, L’affaire Villemin,
Sometimes in April, L’école du pouvoir.
After spending part of his childhood in Congo, he went to school in
France and the USA. He went on to study engineering and economics in
Germany, before entering the Berlin Academy of Film and Television,
where his career started.
Two days before the earthquake in Port-au-Prince, the city where he
was born, he was appointed, by presidential decree, head of La Fémis
École Nationale Supérieure des métiers de l’image et du son in Paris.
Clinton - now U.N. special envoy to Haiti –
“publicly apologized this month for championing
policies that destroyed Haiti's rice production.”
He declared before the American Senate’s
Foreign Affairs commission that “It may have
been good for some of my farmers in Arkansas,
[the state Mr Clinton comes from] but it has not
worked. It was a mistake.” 
Indeed, thirty years ago, Haiti imported just
19% of its food and exported rice and coffee. In
1986, the Haitian President, Jean-Bertrand
Aristide was forced, by Bill Clinton and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) among
others, to drop our trade barriers on the pretext
of structural adjustment. Today, again according
to Jonathan Katz, six pounds of rice from
Riceland Foods of Arkansas, incontestably the
largest rice producer in the world, sold for $3.80,
while the same quantity of Haitian-produced rice
sold for $5.12.
Also, let us not forget that the reason we are
mourning so many dead in Port-au-Prince is
precisely because tens of thousands of peasants,
with no resources, no means of production,
unable to compete with Western imports, had to
move there to look for work. 
Everything is related. The so-called remedies
of yesterday and the disasters of today. The
poverty of the one creates the wealth of the
other, and vice versa. Our destinies are linked by
common problems, to which international aid
alone cannot provide the solution. We need a
more global view. 
Tragedy and mourning such as Haiti is
currently living through can enable us to turn the
current paradigm around. Haiti could become a
new model for intervention. And this is as urgent
for countries of the South as it is for Western
cities, where inequalities are also continuing to
grow. The sooner we start this process of radical
change, the sooner we will be able to join
together in a common quest for more humanity,
justice, equality and – why not? – happiness.
Is this an ambitious, utopian project? I do not
think so. Despite all its failures, humanity has
demonstrated a great capacity for kindness,
creativity and courage – both individually and
collectively. 
Under foreign influence,
Haitian rice production was
destroyed in the 1990s. L
We have to accept that the world is not functioning 
as it should and provide ourselves with the means to
make a radical change.
