When Haiti became one of UNESCO’s first
members, the rate of illiteracy in the country was
over 80%, in some areas even well over 90%. This
comprised not only the inability to read and
write, but also ignorance of basic scientific
principles concerning agriculture, conservation of
resources and hygiene. Haiti’s president of the
time, Dumarsais Estimé, proposed to UNESCO to
support Haiti in increasing the fundamental
education of its population. Julian Huxley,
UNESCO’s first Director-General, who had just
declared that basic education is an essential part
of “the wider and fuller human understanding to
which UNESCO is dedicated”, accepted the
proposition and UNESCO started a pilot project
on basic education, the first of its kind, in 1947. 
In April 1948, UNESCO sent a survey team to
Haiti headed by the Swiss anthropologist Alfred
Metraux. The site chosen by the Haitian
government for the new Pilot project was the
The first UNESCO basic
education pilot project in
Haiti was established in
rural Marbial, in the
Gosseline valley, in
southern Haiti. I



Kêbé l’Inesko Fò!
By Julia Pohle, from UNESCO Archives 
As one of the first member states, Haiti joined UNESCO on
November 18, 1946. Soon after, UNESCO launched its first pilot
project in basic education in the country. The objective was to
reduce illiteracy. The project was almost scrapped; the local
population saved it. 

rural section of Marbial, in the valley of the
Gosseline River in the south of Haiti. The
population of the valley had been estimated at
about 30,000 peasants, living scattered over the
steep mountains in isolated shacks. The
conditions found by the team on their arrival
were at their worst. The valley was over-
populated, the illiterate peasants could hardly live
on the scanty crops they grew on the eroding soil
and they suffered from tropical diseases like
malaria. Because of sickness and the fact that
many children would have to walk two hours to
attend school, less than 500 pupils were
registered in the three schools serving the valley,
and only half of them actually attended the
lessons. 
Besides these problems, there was a
tremendous language barrier to education.
Although the official language of Haiti was
French, Marbial’s people only spoke Creole and
textbooks in this language were not available
since there was no agreement on which of the
four methods of spelling Creole should be
adopted. Teachers were using 50-year-old French
textbooks from which pupils had to memorize
passages, without any real understanding of the
language. To resolve this problem, UNESCO
invited Robert Hall, an American professor who
had done research on Creole in the United States.
Article about the Marbial
project, published in
June1949 in the UNESCO
Courier. L
Market in Marbial. L

Once arrived in Haiti, Dr. Hall established an
alphabet so that the preparation of basic
textbooks in Creole could go ahead. 
Discouraged by conditions in the valley and
the hopelessness of the Marbial peasants,
Metraux returned to UNESCO, giving a very
pessimistic report concerning the success of the
pilot project. Nevertheless, he disagreed when
Frederick Rex, an American fundamental
education specialist, visited Marbial valley some
month later and judged the undertaking
impossible, recommending that UNESCO
abandon the project. Writing to UNESCO, Dr.
Metraux insisted: “We cannot pull out from Haiti
[…] we cannot abandon these people. If we do,
we shall break their spirit completely […]
Whatever has been done in the field of
education will collapse. This will be a complete
disaster […] The UNESCO Pilot Project is an
experience which is worth all our energy.” 
At that point, the peasants of Marbial,
hearing the rumours that UNESCO might
abandon them, joined the efforts.
Demonstrating with huge picket signs reading
“Kêbé l’Inesko Fò! “ – which in Creole means
“Support UNESCO hard” – they sprang into
action. Within a few months, their co-operatives
turned the trail to the only village of the area into
a road and built up an ‘UNESCO-centre’ as well as
a community-centre, which helped the people of
the valley to break out of their isolation. The
peasants dug latrines and a well for drinking
water in order to erase one of the most
dangerous sources of disease. They
reconstructed the Marbial market on higher and
drier ground and constructed a small open-air
slaughter house. 
Also in education, there was remarkable
progress in these first years: An emergency
feeding programme for school children was
introduced, giving a substantial lunch to 400
children weekly. Until September 1948, ten
education centres were created, teaching old
and young in the Valley to read and write in
Creole. Soon a local newspaper of two pages
appeared, handwritten and illustrated with
simple drawings, through the initiative of a few
members of the co-operatives. 
Despite the peasants’ efforts, UNESCO saw
itself confronted with an immense challenge:
raising the social and economic level of the
community through education and at the same
time training Haitian teachers and workers so
that the project might become self-supporting
as rapidly as possible. It was soon obvious that all
progress in the valley would depend on the
improvement of agricultures. That is the reason
why Conrad J. Opper, appointed as Director to
the pilot project in 1950, asked the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
to join in the Marbial project. Mr. Opper
reported: “There is no possible doubt that a
project in Fundamental Education in the Marbial
area which is not based on soil regeneration is
unrealistic and doomed to failure.” The World
Health Organization (WHO) also took an active
part in the project, sending a doctor and a nurse
to the valley. It further helped to open a new
hospital in Marbial, thus giving the valley its first
dispensary facilities. 
During this perhaps unspectacular, but steady
development, Mr. Opper and its team tried to
keep in the background as much as possible,
placing the project in the hand of the people it
was intended to help. This policy proved so
successful, that in August 1950 the Marbial
people formed a regional committee of local
leaders to advise the UNESCO staff. The common
effort of different UN agencies helped the Marbial
valley to improve the living conditions of its
peasants. But when the pilot project succeeded, it
did it thanks to the Haitian people. 
Julia Pohle works for the UNESCO archives
(www.unesco.org/archives/fre/index.html)
The example of the Marbial valley pilot project is just one example of
UNESCO’s work in Haiti in the field of education, culture, science and
communication. There is clear continuity from this early vision to
UNESCO’s contribution at the beginning of the 21st century. Original
documents, publications and correspondence files about the Marbial
valley project and UNESCO’s work in Haiti are available in the
UNESCO Archives.  Contact : j.boel@unesco.org
