Your life as an adult and as a poet
began with what you later called 
"a triple badge of rebellion": proud
négritude, impassioned surrealism, and
the idea of revolution. Today only the
surrealism part seems to have survived. 
It's a long story. When André Breton
came to Haiti at the end of 1945, his visit
coincided with an exhibition of the
Cuban painter Wifredo Lam's paintings
and a series of lectures given by the
Martinique poet Aimé Césaire. This
really fired the imagination of us young
Haitian artists and writers. At that time
we knew nothing about what was
happening in the surrealist movement
in France. For young people combating
President Elie Lescot's dreadful
dictatorship, surrealism was the
lifeblood of revolt. Contact with Breton
had a contagious effect on us. After his
first lecture in a Port-au-Prince cinema,
we brought out a special issue of our
new magazine La Ruche as a tribute to
him. We went to prison for our pains
and the magazine was banned. What
Breton discovered in Haiti, and made us
discover too, was that surrealism wasn't
just an aesthetic doctrine but
something that could be part of a
people's way of looking at the world;
that there was a kind of grassroots
surrealism. This restored our self-
confidence. We saw that this sense of
wonder we had secretly been a bit
ashamed of and associated with a kind
of underdevelopment was actually our
weapon. Breton told us that in France



UNESCO
Archives
René Depestre: 
Between utopia and reality
In this interview published in the UNESCO Courier in December 1997, the French-
Haitian author René Depestre discusses his career in an interview with Jasmina
Šopova. He reiterates his rejection of totalitarian ideology and his commitment to
global citizenship, founded on solidarity and mutual respect. 
"we launched surrealism as a movement
based on intellectual foundations, you
in Haiti learned all about it in the cradle."
In other words, surrealism was
something inherent in the Caribbean.
Voodoo, a product of Franco-African
syncretism, is an example of religious
surrealism. The behaviour of the voodoo
gods is supremely surrealist. 
So surrealism for you is much more
than a literary movement. 
Much more. Many European writers,
starting with the German Romantics
and even before that, had a surrealist
approach. I'm sure if you looked closely
at Egyptian, Japanese or Chinese
culture, you'd find surrealist elements
there too. For one, surrealism is a way of

René Depestre at UNESCO
in 2006, for the 50th
anniversary of the first
international congress of
black writers and artists
organized in Paris.  I

injecting the supernatural into everyday
life. You find it everywhere. But some
people, like Haitians or Brazilians,
display it more boldly than others.
How do you explain the emergence of
the Duvaliers in a society imbued
with a sense of the magical? 
The magical has even marked Haitian
politics. Our history has thrown up
dictators who practised a kind of tragic
perversion of magic. This is how the
"Tonton Macoute" which is a folk
concept, an incarnation of evil, a kind of
Nazi, a Haitian SS-man came to exist.
Haitian folklore is a tug-of-war between
good and evil. The elder Duvalier, "Papa
Doc," used the forces of black magic to
plunge the country into a totalitarian
surrealism. But there's more to it than
this demoniacal aspect. From the
December morning in 1492 when
Christopher Columbus discovered Haiti
and was transfixed by what he saw, the
historic, baroque tale of Haiti cannot be
separated from American wondrous
realism. A sense of the wondrous (South
American magic realism) has become
part and parcel of Haitians' view of the
world and the sustenance of their third
of the  island of Hispaniola, where the
best and the worst rub shoulders like
the dearest of friends, when they are
not locked in terrible combat. 
You have celebrated the communist
utopia in your poems. 
The Marxist utopia, with all its lies and
repressive nightmares, took over my
work and my life as a poet until the
moment I broke with Stalinism. After
living in places which had a huge
"strategic" importance in the turmoil of
our century Moscow, Prague, Beijing,
Hanoi and Havana I realized that what
was meant by "socialist revolution" in
those places was not the opposite of the
Haitian terror regime, but another form
of the same perversion. Instead of
promoting the heritage of the rights of
man and the citizen, "the revolution"
defiled the autonomy of women and
men and carried out, at their expense,
the most amazing hijack of ideals and
dreams in all human history. 
What has become of the "revolutionary
ideal" which drew you from Haiti to
Europe and then on to Cuba? 
I ardently believed in revolution. For me it
became a kind of natural state, like
breathing, walking or swimming. And it
nearly destroyed my integrity as a citizen
and a writer. The ideal of revolution
seriously impoverished my personal store
of poetry and tenderness which, when I
was twenty, made me think of my future
work as a state of wonder and oneness
with the world. It made my literary career
that of a writer who performed
psychological and intellectual
somersaults and sudden existential
about-turns a kind of carnival of
uncertainties and inconsistencies, adrift
in the furious currents of the century's
passions and ideals. The treasure islands
invented by the utopias and mythologies
of revolution went up in smoke with the
great dreams of our youth uniting the
idea of transforming the world (Karl Marx)
with that of changing life (Arthur
Rimbaud). 
The word "utopia" as used by Marxists
has a pejorative meaning for you. But
doesn't the world need utopias? 
Octavio Paz has defined utopias as "the
dreams of reason." We're just emerging
from a terrible nightmare of reason. The
nineteenth century, a critical age if ever
there was one, gave birth to the idea of a
revolutionary utopia. But the totally
legitimate dream of earlier philosophers
did not turn into the major
transformation of human lives they had
hoped for, nor into unprecedented
progress for humankind. The generous
aspirations of critical thought imposed on
us, under the bogus label of "real
socialism," an absolutism the like of which
we had never seen before. In saying this I
do not wish to denigrate the idea of
utopia as such. Old age reminds me these
days that I don't have much time left and
that I must hasten to express things I've
kept to myself all my life. And hopefully
express them with grace and maturity. So,
in a way, I'm summing up my life's
nomadic journey. And all self-criticism
leads one to utopia. But hardened
observer that I am, I deeply distrust a
historical concept that this century's
revolutions have debased. In place of the
notion of realpolitik, which is at the root
of most of the woes of people and
societies and which still flourishes to an
extraordinary degree in government, I
offer the notion “realutopia”. 
Could you explain what you mean by
“realutopia”:?
It's an aesthetic concept which enables
me to unite the various parts of my
Franco-Haitian creole-ness as a writer.
Doctors and physiologists call synergy
the links between several elements which
combine in a single function and a
common effect. The idea of realutopia
leads me to a kind of aesthetic and
literary synergy which points in a single
direction the multitude of experiences
that I owe to magical reality, to négritude,
to sun-kissed eroticism and to the creole
fantasizing of Haitians, which is the
surrealism of the humbled and the hurt. 
So you haven't entirely turned your
back on négritude? 
I've always mistrusted the idea of
négritude because I did not think it was
possible to constitute an anthropology
which is the exact opposite of the one
which devalued us and downgraded us
as "Blacks". You can't just transfer to a
Black context what is said and done in

Parade of “Tontons Macoutes” in the town of Kenscoff in 1984. L

Who could promote this global public-
spiritedness? 
I see the bold imagination of poets and
writers at the forefront of the values
shared by the world's cultures. Our works,
each with its own strictly aesthetic
identity, should help scientists and
politicians to revamp our old ideas about
good and evil, to revive a sense of the
sacred which is being lost and to devise a
more balanced relationship between
North and South, and East and West. This
would be in a new world order where the
necessary rules of commerce, tempered
by a new sense of meaning and new
ideals, could express a fresh balance
between nature and history. To advance
further without risking disaster, the spirit
of the market should now be endowed
with certain ethical features, such as
meaning, laws of citizenship and an art of
living together based on mutual respect
and sympathy between the world's
peoples and societies.  

terms of Whites. Aimé Césaire referred to
this phenomenon as turning Gobineau
upside down. I realized we had to create
our own aesthetic and ideology without
falling into "anti-racist racism." That's why
I said goodbye to négritude at the same
time as I dropped Marxism. I've only stuck
with surrealism, which is still one of my
working tools. I use both ends of the tool
the scholarly and the popular. But I
mistrust surrealism too. Breton leaned
towards the occult, trying to link
surrealism with certain cabbalistic and
Talmudic traditions, a shadowy area in
the history of thought - but no less
interesting for that - which are the
equivalent of looking for the
philosopher's stone. I don't go along with
that at all. I've rejected the ideals of my
youth and today I work with the tragic
experiences which in my case they led to. 
How do you see the world these days? 
The idea of revolution has been buried
and history marches on, with its media-
fed procession of horrors and marvels.
The myth of a great consummation of the
body and the mind died of natural causes
in a big Soviet-style bed. The corpse is still
warm and already the spark of
totalitarianism has reappeared in the
shape of religious fundamentalism. All
kinds of ethno-nationalist savagery,
supposedly under the banner of a
campaign to renew faithless societies, are
building monuments to obscurantism,
terrorism and new banditry by the state.
On the borders of the West, the idea of a
fundamentalist utopia has taken the
place of a revolutionary one. 
How can literature inspire people to
embark on the adventure of a new
renaissance? 
The answer to that is shaped by a context
of fundamentalist horrors, interethnic
massacres and racist and nationalist
violence. It's one of a planet completely
ruled by market forces. Thanks to the
rational instruments of the rule of law and
democracy, the institution of the market
has survived all attacks on it. But most
people now think the democracy of the
market, its basis and the way it works,
needs to be overhauled. Or else life in
society is going to become a great
planet-wide casino. So it's in the interests
of the victorious marketplace to do
something about the chaotic and
aggressive conditions in which the
globalization of human affairs is taking
place. Bold steps should be taken to
make good use of the world's heritage of
democratic experience, the rich store of
rules of citizenship and the art of living
together which is to be found in Western
civil societies, the most developed and
experienced in terms of law, liberties,
justice and solidarity. We should be able
to turn the current haphazard process of
globalization into an unprecedented
Immunization of relations between
individuals and nation-states. The
international civil society which is
growing up amid disorder and
uncertainty needs the oxygen of world-
wide public-spiritedness and the idea of
solidarity that will be conducive to fair
distribution of the values and principles
which are now the shared property of the
global village.

Boy participating in the carnival in 
Jacmel, Depestre’s home town. JJ
“Ezili Danto”, by Grand Rue sculptor 
Andre Eugene, Port-au-Prince. J
