
“Attacked, ostracized, coveted,
subjected to gunboat diplomacy, divided,
militarized, battered.” This is the image the
Haitian historian and diplomat Dantes
Bellegarde paints of his country, adding
“Haiti’s independence, endlessly
threatened throughout its tumultuous
and chaotic history, is still something of a
miracle.” 
Indeed, the first black republic has
suffered considerable pressure from both
within and without, which has made for a
turbulent trajectory. Ostracized by the
superpowers, who couldn’t accept the
emancipation of this black Tom Thumb,
Haiti has faced tyrannical regimes
founded upon the exclusion of the
people, held in a state of utter destitution
and despair.
The superpowers adopted a tough
stance, whether it was France
withdrawing precious financial resources
from the fledgling nation, or the 19 years
of American occupation at the start of the
20th century. And the long night of
slavery left deep and lasting scars on the
social and financial life of Haitians. The
master-slave relationship and the rift
between the bô lan mè people (those
living by the sea) and the gwo soulyé
(peasant farmers) are examples of
schisms that persisted beyond the end of
slavery, and still, more than two centuries
after independence, undermine the
structure of Haitian society. 
But how does one really escape from
slavery? Once the exuberance of freedom
has worn off, how does one construct
liberty? Because it needs substance, so
that “the trials of liberty do not become
insupportable,” as the Greek-born French
philosopher, Cornélius Castoriadis, has
emphasised, before going on to explain
that “that only happens when one
manages to do nothing with that
freedom.” 
The great Toussaint Louverture and,
after him, the founding fathers of the
Haitian Republic, may have won the
fundamental battle for humanism, but it
would seem they failed when it came to
implementing a new social charter.
Freedom
Very soon after independence, the old
relationships of servitude were
reproduced. The farmer-generals took the
place of the colonials, the former slaves
were subjected to forced labour, confined
to the plantation, remaining aneu logou,
i.e. denied any freedom of speech, the
right to deliberate or to be inventive.
Marronage, which was once celebrated as
an act of resistance against the
oppression of slavery, was, from the time
of the first (1801) constitution, seen as a
form of vagrancy and punished with
severe penalties. This agrarian militarism
(caporalisme agraire) was in force right up
until 1904, a century after Haitian
independence! The peasants, who had
fought for freedom, were sidelined from
essential debates on how to break with
the colonial past.
It is easy to understand how the very
structure of the master-slave relationship
could make it difficult to use the law to
construct freedom, considering how
much it saps the Caribbean spirit and
dislocates family structures. Indeed, the
father figure becomes devalued as soon
as his place is usurped by the master, and
this destabilises the rule of law – the
menacing figure of the master, who is
“beyond the law”, becomes a symbol of
Since Haiti became independent
in 1804, a succession of
traumatic events has marked the
country’s history, complicating
the task of building freedom. The
irresponsible attitudes of
superpowers and national
political leaders have left the
country at an impasse. The only
way out is through responsible
action and solidarity on a global
scale. 
Jacmel carnival figure symbolizing 
liberation from slavery. L


Responsibility, the 
link between freedom
and solidarity
by Bernard Hadjadj

violence and confusion, in opposition to
that of father, who upholds order. “The
words of the father are in accordance with
the law […] whereas the words of the
master are just an echo of themselves,”
wrote the French psychoanalyst, Jacques
André, in L’Inceste focal dans la famille noire
antillaise (1987).
It is in these conditions of political and
psychological violence that Haitian liberty
served its apprenticeship. But, to escape
from slavery means overcoming one’s
negative self-image and finding the light
of true liberation inside oneself, not by
repeating patterns of dominance
inherited from the plantation. It means
rediscovering self-esteem.
Just a few years ago, in 2004, the
Haitian writer, René Depestre, in a letter to
his compatriot, Carl Fombrun, spoke of
another form of slavery to which the
people are still subjected: “Let us abolish
this internal slavery that the theologies of
barbarism impose on the wretched
consciousness of Haiti,” he writes. “Let us
make un unprecedented effort to
rediscover a sense of responsibility, to
confront the row of zeros that two
centuries of incompetence have allowed
to accumulate to the left of our zombie-
like immobility.”
Responsibility
Depending on the way a society
organizes its politics and beliefs, it can
either favour or hinder a sense of
responsibility in its members. Politically,
military dictators and populist totalitarian
leaders in Haiti have often posed as
supreme saviours, believing themselves to
be charged with a divine mission. And
when the leader is seen as a Living God,
the people have nothing more to say. 
Meanwhile, Protestant churches, as
the Haitian ethnologist Charles-Poisset
Romain notes, have encouraged
supernatural explanations for
underdevelopment. “Is the Church not to
blame for encouraging and preaching
fatalism, and of training quitters, rather
than vicars?” he writes in Le Protestantisme
dans la société haïtienne (1986). But
fatalism leads to inaction and an attitude
of spectator, rather than critic, of what is
happening.
Then there is voodoo, whose lavé tèt
initiation rite is emblematic. It consists of
introducing into the head of the initiate a
Loa, a kind of guardian angel, a protecting
spirit. According to the French
anthropologist Roger Bastide, it is “not the
physical head of the individual, but his
intelligence, his sensitivity, his psycho-
physical life; it is the spirit, in a word, in
relation to the soul.” If there is indeed a
kind of doubling involved, one might well
wonder who commands his actions. If a
crime is committed, who is guilty?
One often hears Haitians say: sé pa fôt
mwin (it’s not my fault), sé pa mwin mêm
(it’s not me, myself), sé de m’yé (I am two),
etc. Responsibility, which is a necessary
condition for any form of freedom, then
becomes a totally relative category. The
principle of reparation associated with
justice is violated, opening the door to
impunity. And it can easily be seen that
this pair – violence-impunity –
impregnates the psychology of the
Haitian masses through and through. 
“Any reform of minds has to come via
the acceptance of our collective failure,”
writes the Haitian educationalist Roger
Péreira, in his article, “Haïti or the trial of
freedom” (2001). “We are all part of the
problem; it is on this condition alone that
we can all be part of its solutions.”
Solidarity
Also, although responsibility is above all a
personal matter, it must be understood,
following the Israeli philosopher Martin
Buber, that every human being can only
define himself as I when in contact with
thou. Every individual I is part of the I-thou
dyad that underlies the world of
relationships. Relationships are by
definition interdependent. 
If there is one precursor to the
development of solidarity between
beings, it is freedom, in the Arendtian1
sense, i.e. merging with politics, this public
space where ‘living together’ is forged
through dialogue. Freedom can only be
practiced in society, by giving expression
to concern for the other whether close or
distant, and a concern for the general
interest. 
Freedom and responsibility cannot be
dissociated and can only be expressed
fully through solidarity, without which we
would be reduced to what the French
philosopher, Jean-Claude Michéa called
monadic egos, without a soul. A world
that is not interdependent would abolish
humans. 
More than ever, during the terrible
times that Haiti has been living through
since the earthquake of 12 January 2010,
the central question of responsibility is
raised – both that of Haitians and that of
the international community – and of
national and global solidarity. UNESCO, in
its function as intellectual watchdog and
disseminator of ideas and ethical values,
will have a role to play alongside Haitians
in introducing the principle of
responsibility wherever there is dialogue
in Haiti, and notably in education. It is a
matter of accompanying the physical
reconstruction of the country with a social
and civil reconstruction founded upon
education and culture. 
1. Hannah Arendt (1906-1975), German-born,
naturalized American professor of political theory.
“To those who see no more than ratiocination in the re-examination of the past
suggested in this article, one may reply that it is the sine qua non of an
openness towards the future. It is not a matter of seeking ghosts of a past that
some may think has gone forever, but, as the French philosopher Emmanuel
Lévinas, wrote, of “reviving the radicalism of a memory which, through the
passage of time, inscribes a permanent and fertile tension between past and
future, between the particular and the universal.” – B.H.
A staff member of UNESCO,  Bernard
Hadjadj has a PhD in the socio-
economics of human resources. After
spending 10 years conducting
research in social science, he joined
the French Ministry for Cooperation
and, for ten years, held posts as Head
of cooperation and cultural action in
Haiti, Benin and Djibouti. African and
Haitian by adoption, he has proved it
through well-researched and
sensitive testimonials in two books: :
L’Afrique en marge (1998) and L’An
prochain à Port-au-Prince : Sortir de
l’esclavage (2007).
