in Haiti, with its high rate of illiteracy, 94% of the
population owns a radio, according to a survey by
the French agency, Médiascom. But the FM band is
saturated – there are already over 40 stations in the
capital – and the government agency that looks at
applications for frequencies is no longer awarding
licenses. Competition is high for advertising
revenue and the “top” stations, like Métropole,
Vision 2000, Caraïbes, Ginen, Signal and Kiskeya
have grabbed the lion’s share. Many others, lacking
the necessary financial resources, broadcast
technically poor programmes, often put together
by completely untrained staff. These stations are no
more than sounding boards, devoting a significant
part of air time to petty politics, in the form of
accusations, indiscretions, slander, and clan
quarrels. The same holds for the dozen or so
television channels that have sprung up in the past
three years.
Articulate, objective and rigorous critical
thinking is the prerogative of a few seasoned
journalists. The two daily papers, Le Nouvelliste and
Le Matin, both of which started at the end of the
19th century, are still sentinels, despite their
modest circulation (20,000 copies per edition) and
very limited distribution outside the capital.
The Haitian press has not developed the
necessary detachment to help unite the Haitian
people. It has not marshalled the human resources
to rise to the huge challenges facing the country:
threat of earthquakes, urgent need for
redevelopment, environmentally damaging energy
production, education, reorganisation of the
economy and production, showcasing the
country’s art and culture. And this was the situation
for the Haitian media well before the earthquake of
12 January 2010. 
As with many other sectors of society, the media
were severely affected by the earthquake. Two
months on, most have resumed production, but with
the same old programme schedules and no sign of
any new commitment regarding the new challenges
posed by the catastrophe. However, Le Nouvelliste
and Le Matin have announced that they will be more
exacting, even militant, and that they will use the
tragedy as an opportunity for a “spring clean”.
Critical thinking stifled
I am not here to put my predecessors on trial. Many
of them paid with their lives for the right I now



The Haitian press: 
A turning 
point
A certain degree of freedom of expression
characterizes Haitian media. But the media must
take a hard look at itself and rid itself of triviality so
that it can act as a mobilizing force.
by
Roberson
Alphonse
The Haitian
press has 
to give
responsible
freedom a try.

Critical thinking stifled:
scene from Port-au-Prince
carnival, February 1985. L

enjoy to practise my vocation with a certain degree
of freedom. I am simply questioning certain
positions that have been adopted, some of which
verge on fanaticism, reinforcing existing rifts,
exacerbating political and social tensions and
fostering a mistrust of the press.
This failure of the media is part of a wider
context, where Haitian society has ceased to be
demanding, to reward merit, to have high
ambitions. It cannot seem to escape the
debilitating status quo it has been stuck in for the
past decades. Learning, which for a long time
underwrote political power, has not been used
judiciously. On the contrary, Haiti is one of the few
countries where knowledge is divisive. Meanwhile,
a magical-religious perception of science creates
the most incredible situations. And, for many of my
compatriots, the death of the 200,000 or so victims
of 12 January was not because building regulations
were flouted, but because of God! This was God’s
decision, they say. The churches are constantly full.
The priests are rubbing their hands.
Meanwhile, popular – not to say trivial –
entertainment still makes up the bulk of certain
radio stations, also overrun with advertisements for
imported products. Where are the real issues? “It’s
not what the public wants to hear,” you will be told.
And so, critical thinking continues to be stifled.
Reinventing the press
Now, even more than in the past, there is an urgent
need to work towards a paradigm shift in
information and to organize a States-General of the
press. This major change of direction – the
invention of a modern press, which is professional,
courageous, ambitious, freed from the grip of
political power and the financial establishment – is
easier said than done. But it must be done. It will be
a long and arduous process, requiring a responsible
partnership between State, regulatory bodies, and
independent media stakeholders. 
Before the earthquake, two different schools of
thought clashed on the need or not to have a law
regulating the press. Those who favour legislation
dream of regulatory bodies like the French Higher
Council for Radio and Television. Those who are
against, having endured the Duvalier dictatorships,
see dictatorial tendencies and backlash in any
attempt to introduce norms. The belief that we can
do everything without standards or constraints is a
form of atavism for us, in Haiti, and is an enormous
handicap.
First of all the Haitian press has to remodel
itself, before trying to mobilise social and
intellectual resources. In the short term, I think we
need to design training programmes for journalists.
The support of UNESCO, which has long-standing
links to the Haitian Association of Journalists, will
once again be welcome. The Ministry of Education,
the Ministry of Culture and Communication,
journalists’ associations and newspaper publishers’
associations, will have to work together to decide
on the curricula. And, besides training, we also
need to address another vexing question: paying
professional journalists a decent wage. Today, a
journalist’s basic salary is 100 Euros a month.
The challenge, in the world of communications,
as in other sectors, is enormous. Nevertheless, I
believe in the future of my country and in the
future of a new press. I believe that a new
intellectual, financial and political elite will emerge
from the ruins. A responsible elite that is committed
to building a different kind of citizenship, another
sense of community, a new meaning for the word
Haitian. The Haitian press, once it has been
remodelled, will play a leading role. To borrow a
friend’s expression, it has to “give responsible
freedom a try”, to make a clear-cut distinction
between the intellectual elite and Haitian politics –
in other words, to help the people to choose their
leaders carefully. If this is not done, we will once
again fail to get to the heart of the matter. We must
act now. 
Roberson Alphonse is a journalist on the daily Le Nouvelliste (Haiti), news
editor at Radio Magik 9 and chairman of the Commission on continuing
education for the Association of Haitian Journalists (AJH).
Come down to earth,
journalists! L
I believe in the
future of my
country and 
in the future 
of a new press. 
I believe that 
a new
intellectual,
financial and
political elite
will emerge
from the ruins
