Gender Equality - 
A Development
Imperative
African elder statesman Sam Nujoma is revered as 
the man who led the Republic of Namibia to its
independence in 1990 and served as its President for 
15 years. His promotion of gender parity is a less well-
known aspect of his freedom fighting. In this interview,
he explains to Hans d’Orville and Clare Stark how he sees
the role of women in his country and internationally

that everybody must contribute in order
to ensure the eradication of poverty
What was the role of women in your
country’s liberation struggle?
Women played a key role in the
liberation struggle. We had battalions of
women, and they were often tougher
than the men. In order to promote the
economic development of the country,
we, in the South West Africa’s People’s
Organization (SWAPO) party, decided
that women should be represented by
50% in the SWAPO Party Congress. Our
Secretary-General is a woman,
Pendukeni Iivula-Ithana. She is also the
Minister of Justice.
President Sam Nujoma at
UNESCO in 2004. J

Is the same also true for the
Government of Namibia? Are you also
working to have 50% of women in
ministerial positions?
That is what we are planning, but we are
not there yet. Women make up 22% of
our national assembly at present. We
have to fulfill our obligation to both the
South African Development Community
(SADEC), our regional, economic
grouping, and to the African Union,
which have both stipulated that women
should make up 50% of the government
by 2015. 
Are you proposing that additional
funds be reserved in the national
budget for gender equality in order
to promote women’s participation?
I don’t think that there is a need to
enlarge the national budget to employ
women in the government, but I do
think that more funding is needed to
ensure that all children, both boys and
girls, in every district of the SWAPO
party are introduced to the computer so
that they will be better equipped to
succeed in this globalized world.   
Education is key to development. At
the time of independence, the quality of
education that you received was based
on the color of your skin and you ethnic
background, with of course the whites
receiving the best education. This
system was imposed by the apartheid
regime so we had to dismantle all of
that after independence. The current
Prime Minister, H.E. Nahas Angula, who
was then Minister of Education, Culture,
Youth and Sport in 1990 when Namibia
achieved independence, was
responsible for reforming the education
system in Namibia, and now, thanks to
him, we have a very good education
system in Namibia.  
Do you think that the development
projects taking place in Namibia now
are sufficiently reaching out to
women?
Women in Namibia are encouraged to
participate in all aspects of the country’s
development.  
How do you feel in terms of gender
equality in the multilateral system?
Are you satisfied, or do you think that
current trends should continue?
In the multilateral system, I would
venture to say that at least 85% of  all
UN specialized agencies should be led
by women, as they are more apt to be
able to address issues that focus on
promoting human-centered
development. 
Hans d’Orville is Assistant Director-
General for Strategic Planning. 
Clare Stark is Assistant Programme
Specialist, Office of the Assistant Director-
General for Strategic Planning.
This column, launched by UNESCO’s
Bureau of Strategic Planning, focuses on
future-oriented issues and aims to inform
both the general public and the
Organization’s Member States. It presents
ideas and opinions that can enrich
UNESCO’s reflection, programmes and
action in its various fields of competence.
The number of women holding leadership positions in the United
Nations system has increased recently. Irina Bokova of Bulgaria was
elected as Director-General of UNESCO in October. The World Health
Organization (WHO) is headed by Margaret Chan, the World Population
Fund (WFP) by Thoraya Obaid, the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) by Ann Margaret Veneman, the World Food Programme (WFP)
by Josette Sheeran and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) by Helen Clark.
