It is not possible to build the economy
of a country without first drafting an
economic policy and having an
administration that is capable of taking
responsibility for it. Yet Haiti has neither.
The economy is synonymous with the
idea of progress, which we do not have
either. And there is the rub. The ordinary
Haitian citizen does not regard himself
as an engineer helping to build his
country. He is waiting for progress to
come from outside. For him, prosperity
lies in God’s hands. 
We do not allow ourselves to build
our own country, to change our reality.
We vacillate over the right path to take
to rebuild our economy. We remain
stuck in a mire of uncertainty, not
knowing what to do. 
The 12 January 2010 disaster is
forcing us to take a close look at our
immobility. We can no longer put off
changes in the way the economy is run
– still very much dependent on external
rents from resources. With just a few
sources of income, mostly from coffee
production, this type of “rentier”
economy benefits only a tiny minority
of the population and excludes the vast
majority. The entire political life of Haiti
is organised around income from
renting resources, and strives to protect
the few elected representatives who
oppose any attempt to diversify, in
order to preserve their own privileges.
And, to do this, they will stop at nothing
to occupy important political posts.
Haitian households are locked into a
vicious circle, enduring extreme
hardship. They have to save for at least
ten years before they have enough
money to start building a house and
then spend the rest of their lives trying
to finish it. It is almost impossible to get
a loan in Haiti. The country’s whole
economy is based on savings, which
leads to cash collateral (i.e. credit equal
to the amount the borrower has in his
savings account) and, as a result, the
aberration of investing uniquely with
wealth that has already been acquired. 
This situation highlights the
absence of a monetary policy or credit
system that is open to the needs of
ordinary people, in a country where the
government is mainly concerned with
the interests of those with income from
external rents. This also explains the
emergence of government substitutes,
in the forms of NGOs, the international
community and … God! – all supposed
to look after the needs of the people. 
No salvation without credit
Haiti will never get back on its feet
without adopting an economy based on
credit. If the 200,000 families that fell
victim to the earthquake are ever to buy
a home again, they will have to be able
to get a mortgage that they can pay off
over 15 or 20 years. And, given that
most households cannot raise the



The Haitian economy’s
vicious circle
The prevailing immobility is sustaining an obsolete economy that
condemns Haiti to poverty and blocks progress. Rather than waiting 
for God to help them, Haitians should abolish the “rentier” system that paralyzes
the country.
by 
Gérald Chéry

Haitians have to save money for ten years to
start building a house.
© Jocelyne Beroard

obligatory 30% of the total purchase
price stipulated by law, their job should
stand as guarantee for the loan.
Also, if loans are given to
earthquake victims, then they should be
available to everyone. The whole credit
system has to be generalised and made
accessible to all, including, and above
all, to enterprises, so that they can grow
and provide jobs and thus enable
families to repay their loans.
Loans, then, should be based on the
future employment of borrowers, in
other words, on their skills, which
implies that they should be able to
receive training matched to the needs
of the market. The overall volume of
credits and investments will thus
depend on the capacity of the
workforce to be competitive on world
markets, and not on savings or foreign
aid. 
The credit economy is not matter of
the good will of political leaders or
individuals, but is a fundamental factor
in the productive apparatus of a nation.
If the State does not have a policy that
lends credibility to the various
economic stakeholders, then the
country will continue to flounder in the
same problems it has always had. 
To make the reconstruction of Haiti
possible, it is essential that the State
accepts to run an economy that is based
on the needs of all social groups and
not just an elite living on private income
from external rents.
Managing loans and gifts
The extraordinary solidarity shown by
the international community towards
Haiti translates as donations and loans
that will, above all, be used to rebuild
urban areas. Construction companies will
share the funds between them. And the
donors will be satisfied if the programme
is completed with a minimum of
corruption. 
But, with the exception of Port-au-
Prince, the impact of this aid on the
national economy will be minimal and
transient, if the decision is made to
import building materials on a massive
scale. Once the money has run out, the
State will have its buildings, a few
families will have homes, while
everyone else will be left to fend for
themselves. The ‘rentier’ economy will
have traversed a brief period of
prosperity, while the problems of
financing production and of
employment will remain unresolved.
The mismanagement of natural
disasters in the past six years speaks
volumes on this subject.
In order to get the full benefit of
outside aid and build the foundations
for a new economy, the country’s
leaders should appeal to international
institutions temporarily to exonerate
Haiti from certain rules regulating
international commerce. They should
also encourage setting up a first wave of
industries related to building (steel and
cement works, electrical equipment,
etc) and fitting out homes (appliances,
sanitary ware, decorating supplies),
which are sectors that have not been
promoted in the past because of the
lack of demand. Emphasis should also
be put on training, because it is only
with qualified workers and competitive
products that the country will be able to
pay off its external debt. 
Other changes will be necessary to
boost employment in Haiti, such as
decentralisation and local development;
social security reforms which encourage
workers to choose careers in industry;
reforms in economic policy that enable
the release of internal capital;
facilitation of public-private
partnerships to stimulate the
development of industry and to support
the State in sectors of the economy
where its presence is ineffectual;
university reforms to train more
professionals and supply the
administration with new ideas on
economic and social change. 
Gérald Chéry, economist, is a
member of the Haitian National
Commission for Public Procurement.
2 8 . T H E  U N E S C O  C O U R I E R  . S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 0
Man carrying his daughter after the flooding of their home in Cité Soleil, near Port-au-Prince. L
