
Their names are Jan, Jana and Jirka and
they are in their early twenties. They
were all at one time or another involved
in Czech youth NGOs. This meant they
could express their opinions on a range
of subjects, either within their
organizations, in their town or – why
not – Europe-wide. Until reality caught
up with them... It was practically
impossible for them to be heard at
national level! “So we decided to change
things,” explains Jan Husak, 23, studying
European affairs in Brno, the country’s
second largest city, and coordinator of a
project that began in 2010. “Until then,
only active members of an institution
like the national children’s and youth
parliament – in other words, young
people already involved in the
democratic process – could express
their opinion,” he adds. But other young
people were left out...
Obviously, Czech youth does not
face the same problems as those in a
country like Uganda, but this does not
mean they are not discriminated
against. “There were a few bad


Young
Czechs
want to have
their say
“Kecejme do toho!” [Let’s chip in!] is a project started by
three young Czechs. Their idea is to give fellow citizens aged
16 to 26 the chance to express their opinion on matters
affecting them directly. It’s a lab for new ideas and a real
step forward for democracy for Czech youth.
MATHIEU PONNARD
experiences...” says Jan. “Some young
people sent round a petition and
demonstrated against a decision that
affected them directly – the
introduction of a new national
baccalaureate. But, even though one of
the priorities of the Czech Republic’s
youth policy is to involve them, the
politicians didn’t even have the grace to
accept the petition! To paraphrase
Shakespeare, I concluded there was
“something rotten in the State of
Denmark” – except it was the Czech
Republic!” It was this incident that led to
the creation of Kecejme do toho – its
founders wanted to show that
politicians can and must accept, at least
out of courtesy, young people’s right to
express their opinion nationally, in
accordance with the principles of
democracy.
Since then, Czech youth has been
asked its opinion on a number of issues
concerning their age-group, their
problems and expectations – ranging
from higher education fees, the right to
vote at 16, hazing and bullying at
school, the legalisation of cannabis, sex
education and jobs for teenagers, to
controversial “baby drop boxes”. Since
2005, Statim, a foundation for
abandoned children, has been installing
these boxes around the Czech Republic
so that desperate mothers can leave
their unwanted babies safely and
discreetly.
Like everywhere else, these young
people, whether unemployed, students
or those with regular jobs, use
Facebook, Twitter and the internet to
communicate and act collectively. 
How does it work?
In practical terms, the young people first
of all vote on a given topic, using
internet and social networks. Kecejme do
toho! then looks at the arguments “for”
and “against” and gathers information
that will be useful later on in discussions
as part of public debates held all over
the country.
During this second stage, the
organizers are happy just to facilitate
the discussion until a common position
is agreed. Through Kecejme do toho!
young volunteers are also invited to
organize these workshops and
discussion groups themselves, in their
classrooms, youth clubs or simply in a
café.

given direction... But that would not be
democracy. Compromise is
compromise.” Jan is categorical.
“Personally, I see our organization as a
very good school for democracy with
the creation of this compromise
position and its subsequent progress.
But we are still only at an experimental
stage! My original commitment was
based on a theory that made sense...
And I wanted to see if this theory
actually worked in reality. The main
thing is to prove that we live in a
democratic country, that if we do
something, we can obtain results,
educate and prove through positive
example it can work, and we can raise
the level of youth involvement in
national issues.”
A laboratory for democracy
Kecejme do toho! is an independent
organization that receives no funding
from private sponsors or political
parties. It is supported by a platform of
youth NGOs and the Czech Council for
Children and Youth. The organization
has received a promise from the
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport
that the results of its final conferences
will be taken into account just like an
internal report on youth opinion. “This is
exactly what we wanted,” says Jan,
enthusiastically. “We wanted young
people using the principles of
democracy to be heard by the official
political system and for their opinion to
be considered alongside other points of
view.”
The  Kecejme do toho! experiment  is
receiving support from the European
“Youth in Action” programme and by
the European Commission
representatives in the Czech Republic –
a European dimension that its
coordinator does not disown. “We are
also part of the European Union
‘Structured Dialogue with Young People’
initiative,” he says, “which extends over
18 months and three presidencies
(Spain, Belgium and Hungary), on the
theme of youth employment. We held a
discussion on this subject and prepared
a report with the Ministry to present to
the EU. It was gratifying to see most of
the results of our discussions being
used within the European political
process. Similarly, our results are now
being discussed by the Commission, the
European Parliament, and the United
Nations Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC)... This is a great source of
satisfaction!”
For the time being, Kecejme do toho!
is still unique, in a country where youth
has always stood up to those in power
and tried to change things. So far, the
organization has linked up only with
partners in Slovakia, to create points of
reference in a neighbouring country.
But this original initiative, involving a
country’s entire youth population,
deserves to be replicated everywhere,
so that a nation’s young people can
have their say on issues that concern
them. ■
Mathieu Ponnard, 34, is a French
journalist currently living in Prague. 
J Poster for European Youth Week, 15 to 21 May 2011
©
 D
R
In a third stage, those young people
who are interested are invited to a
public discussion, alongside politicians
involved in the issue, as well as the head
of a secondary school. Having discussed
the issue with these experts, the young
people are then able to finalize a
common position, which is then put to
the vote over the internet. 
In the final phase, the results of the
vote are presented to the media,
politicians and specialists in a
concluding conference, where the
young people once again have an
opportunity to question the decision
makers. The results are then passed
onto government, members of
parliament and senators. 
“On quite a few issues, my personal
position is not very different to the final
position adopted at the end, and which
is often fairly wide-ranging. Sometimes I
would like to nudge a position in a


L Jan Husak, 23, founder of “Kecejme do toho!”

The main thing is to prove that
we live in a democratic country,
that if we do something, we can
obtain results.
