Apocalypse scenarios crop up often in
our modern civilization. We have seen
economically driven famines, wars over
gold, oil and diamonds. There are
threats of imminent ecological disaster
and global nuclear war. Civilizations
have disappeared in the past and ours
could also come to an end. Now climate
change, like nuclear winter, joins the
growing list of potential disasters that
could tip mankind towards calamity.
Unlike nuclear war, the agency that
triggers climate change is not clear-cut.
Science has ‘very high confidence’ that
the changes occurring in the
atmosphere are a result of human
industrial activity, pumping billions of
tonnes of greenhouse gases into the
lower atmosphere for the past 150
years.1
No single individual has triggered
climate change, any more than one
individual – not even an individual State
– is in a position to halt the industrial
technologies of modernity. It is true that
consumer decisions on a mass scale
could alter the way corporations
produce goods and services and this
could, in turn, have an impact on
climate change. But, more
fundamentally, to cope adequately with
climate change, the very role of
‘consumer’ needs to be transformed.
Individuals can and do lead very
ecologically friendly lifestyles. But they
soon realize how hard it is when the
community as a whole is not designed
to have a light ecological footprint.2
Ancient cities in Europe and the Middle
East are much easier to walk around
than the densely populated, sprawling
concrete jungles of the New World,
where public transport is a much more
effective way to get around. But in the
low-density suburban sprawl, if public
transport is not well organized, the car is
still king.
In the end, then, it is up to our
political leaders to make the right
decisions. Yet, on an international scale
– the scale on which our future is being
played out – there is an evident lack of
leadership. Every year in the
international conferences on climate
change that have been held since 1995,
our political leaders have failed to
challenge the technological norms that
prevail in modern societies. 
For me, the reasons that those in
leadership positions find it so difficult to
challenge the status quo lie in the twin
apparatus of modern technology and
global economics, which are central to
modern civilisation. And we are all
struggling with this. To transform them
seems impossible, tantamount to
changing civilizations, shifting from one
ecological epoch to another. But,
according to the Royal Society of Great
Britain, we have already done just that. 
In 2010 this venerable body officially
declared that the planet has shifted
from the temperate, placid, Holocene
epoch – which lasted for over 10,000
years, and saw the development of
agricultural and urban civilizations – to
the turbulent and probably catastrophic
Anthropocene epoch, influenced by
man’s activities (from the Greek,
anthropos: human).
The shift had undoubtedly begun
much earlier, at least by 1945 (with our
entry into the nuclear era) and, more
Since the industrial revolution, technological innovation
has been freeing mankind from many of the bonds that link
it to the rest of Nature. But this supposed progress could
have a tragic ending. Climate change is now showing us
that it is time we stopped behaving like strangers in our
own ecological niche.
RUTH IRWIN 



Welcome to the 
Anthropocene
L Maputo, Mozambique.
1. Climate change 2007, IPCC report
2. The ecological footprint is a measure of the
amount of land needed to fill the needs of an
individual (or population) according to his lifestyle:
consumption versus regeneration.
3. Workers' movement at the beginning of the 19th
century in England led by Ned Ludd, which turned
into the massive destruction of machinery, seen as
the main cause of unemployment.
likely, towards the end of the 18th
century, when the Industrial Revolution
significantly changed the way people
relate to their local ecosystems. 
Damaged links between man and
nature
Post-industrial technologies have given
modern man the feeling that he is free
from the bonds that link him to the rest

of Nature. In cities, we are no longer
dependent on local seasonal produce.
Thanks to refrigerated transport and
storage, people living in urban areas
can import food stuffs and other goods
from far afield, compared to a ten
kilometres or so walking distance in the
18th century. We will not die of hunger if
the crops fail, as we would have in the
past – and this has changed the
relationship of city-dwellers to their
local ecology. We may even be unaware
of floods and droughts in surrounding
rural areas, or where our drinking water
comes from, or how healthy our forests
are.  And, as the proportion of global
population living in urban areas grows,
cities are continuing to spread into the
surrounding countryside, with a
constellation of technological and
economic necessities, rather than
public need, dictating how they are
built. 
The physical shape of our cities, our
modes of agriculture, mining, energy
production, forestry, fishing and
commerce have all changed radically in
the space of a century and a half,
transforming the way much of the
world now looks.
Our communities have become so
embedded in the tempo and
expectations of modern technological
innovations that these are even
shaping our understanding of ourselves
as ‘individuals’, as humans, while
narrowing our view of the Earth,
rendering it increasingly remote.
Globalization – the new ecology?
While there has been a long tradition of
small groups of ecologically mindful
people, their impact on the norms of
modern life has been limited. Individual
ethics has meant little to the juggernaut
of modern progress. But climate change
has brought the scale of modern
industrial technology and its by-product
of greenhouse gas emissions into global
consciousness in an unprecedented
way. 
The Anthropocene epoch may
become one of the planet’s major
extinction periods, similar to when the
dinosaurs became extinct 65 million
years ago. For the first time, we can see
clearly the impacts of modern
technological progress on ecology at a
global, planetary scale - unless
something radical shifts. 
But this shift is slow in coming.
International schemes for trading
greenhouse gas emissions, for example,
show just how little the real scale of
ecological realities is being taken into
account.
This is not a Luddite, anti-
technological position.3 But we can no
longer remain strangers in our own
ecological niche. Modernity is global in
scope, and our ecological niche has
become global too. Climate change
makes it clear that ecological boundary
conditions need to be taken seriously.
Gone are the days when the human
imagination is free to construct an ideal
reality. Human activities, technologies
and economics need to be appropriate
for the harsh realities of ecological
conditions. 
The awareness of planetary ecology
that climate change has awakened in us
should force us to shift the normative
lens through which we comprehend the
world. We can do nothing without
strong political decisions on an
international scale. Perhaps
globalization can also be seen as the
‘new Green.’ ■
Ruth Irwin is Senior Lecturer in
Business Ethics at Auckland University
of Technology, New Zealand. She is the
author of Heidegger, Politics and Climate
Change (2008) and Editor of Climate
Change and Philosophy:
Transformational Possibilities (2010),
both published by Continuum, London.
