I grew up in the leafy suburbs of
Johannesburg, and had the privilege of
receiving a private education. Being a
young white learner at a private school
meant that I was somewhat sheltered
from the pain that South Africa was
going through towards the end of
Apartheid, but I cherish, as dearly as all
my fellow South Africans, moments like
Mandela’s release and inauguration and
the World Cup in 2010, that have
defined our new democracy as well as
our national spirit ever since.
I had always imagined starting my
own business, but it wasn’t until after
completing my Bachelor of Business
Science at the University of Cape Town
and spending five years in London’s
corporate world, that Obami was born.
Back then (2007), Obami was an open
and generic social networking site, but
after Facebook opened up beyond its
college networks, I decided to target
Obami to schools. 
Obami is now a social learning
network that provides a communication
and learning platform for teachers,
learners and their parents. It combines
networking tools similar to those found
on sites like Facebook with
comprehensive learning management
tools like those found on Moodle (an
open source learning platform), all from
within a safe environment – it is
intended in large part for children. 
The platform was originally built in
London, but on a trip back to South
Africa in 2008, I made the decision to
move Obami home – if it could work in
Africa, it could (theoretically) work
anywhere. And more importantly, if it
did work, it would make an enormous
social impact in a place that needs it
most.
BARBARA MALLINSON
L A young girl doing school work outside her home in
a South African shanty town.
In 2008, the young South
African Barbara Mallinson,
created Obami, which has
since become the best
friend of pupils in schools
around her country. Neither
black nor white, Obami is
virtual; it is helping to
improve the quality of
education and thus the
quality of life. Obami’s
creator tells her story.
Obami

My best friend

South Africa, a beautiful nation with
a remarkable mix of rich cultures, still
struggles with socio-political challenges
a full 17 years after the birth of its new
democracy. HIV/AIDS, crime, weak
infrastructure and maladministration
are just some of the reasons why South
Africa is one of the world’s poorest
performing nations with regards to
education standards. In 2010, only
23.5% of leavers qualify for further
education, according to an official
report in January 2011.
At 0.68, South Africa’s Gini
Coefficient is one of the highest in the
world (the figure was published by
Bloomberg agency on 25 February
2011). As this coefficient can vary from 0
to 1 with 0 representing perfect equality
of incomes, the figure is an alarming
sign reflecting a nation of great
extremes. Unskilled labour is in
abundance, while skilled labour –
especially in the medical, engineering,
IT, financial and technical fields – is in
severe shortage due to major
underperformance of mathematics and
science within the education sector. This
has only been further amplified by
South Africa’s “Brain Drain” endemic,
where a sizeable proportion of the
country’s professional workers have
emigrated over the past two decades.
Using Obami
It’s an ominous situation, one that can
only be resolved from the bottom up.
My vision was, and still is, to use Obami
in bringing about social change,
starting with education. 
Obami supports three critical areas
of education: resource distribution,
teaching and learning practices, as well
as performance measurement. Teachers
can create, share and access educational
resources using rich media content
tools, while the latest web 2.0 enhanced
interfaces (using Ajax technologies, for
instance) facilitate interaction and
collaboration between and amongst
them, the learners and the learners’
parents, using the model of blogs and
social media. The system also
incorporates an assessment application
for the continual measurement of a
learner’s performance.
I have striven to offer Obami to
schools for free. My motivation for
doing so? So that each and every child
can one day access a quality education
through Obami, no matter what
background they come from. Costs are
currently being supported through
private funding, and I have been
fortunate to receive valuable support in
the form of free hosting from the
country’s biggest Internet Service
Provider, Internet Solutions. I am also
collaborating with existing NGOs in the
schools sector – Edunova, who provide
Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) training to
underprivileged communities, and
Siyavula, who create high quality
educational resources. 
Challenges
However, I am also very aware of the
challenges I am taking on. Besides the
personal sacrifices that my husband
(who now works alongside me) and I
have made in running our own
business, Obami faces significant
external factors. The very market that
stands to benefit the most from Obami
lacks infrastructure and internet
accessibility. In 2009, only 23% of South
Africa’s 25,000 government schools had
a computer centre, and it is estimated
that today, less than 20% of all public
schools are connected to the internet. 
In stark contrast, nearly all of South
Africa’s 2,000 private schools were set
up with connected computer facilities. It
made natural sense for me to target
Obami’s offering to the independent
education sector at first. My strategy: to
capture the small, but highly connected
group of schools, here and abroad, and
leverage their competitive advantages
(i.e. skilled teachers, quality educational
resources, etc) for the good of all.
Already, less privileged schools have
been able to quickly access quality
educational resources created by others
through the platform.
But even in reaching the most
connected of schools, Obami has faced
difficulties. Schools are yet to embrace
the web 2.0 revolution like social,
business and niche communities have,
perhaps because of online safety
concerns – school decision makers have
a responsibility to act as gatekeepers to
what is unknown territory. It has taken
me time to convince them of Obami’s
social learning relevance and its
commitment to providing a safe
environment. Now that the product is
proving itself, with more than 40
registered schools, things have become
easier.
As for connectivity, change is
happening within the continent.
SEACOM, Main One, EASSy, and WACS,
all undersea cable systems connecting
Africa to the digital highway, are set to
exponentially boost Africa’s connectivity
and bring internet access costs down.
Mobile currently dominates Africa’s
internet access mediums, and will
continue as such – it is a giant
developing consumer market. For
schools though, falling hardware costs
(through increased cloud computing
services), will provide a real chance of
being able to set up technology centres
and bridge the digital (and educational)
gap. 
Obami was awarded a spot as one of
the world’s Top 10 Most Innovative
Technologies for 2011 by French
organisation Netexplorateur, in
partnership with UNESCO, Air France,
Deloitte, Orange and a number of other
large organisations, and I was pleased to
have been selected as one of the “Top
200 Young People to Take to Lunch” in
2010 by one of South Africa’s
newspapers, the Mail & Guardian. It’s
always an honour to receive recognition
for Obami – even though it still has so
much further to go. Every milestone
that Obami reaches will only aid in the
quest to improve education standards
and connect more schools across the
continent with rest of the world. ■
K Barbara Manlinson, now 30, is the creator of
Obami, a networking platform for South African
schools.
