They number more than a billion and most of
them live in developing countries. The world
population of 15- to 24-year-olds represents
more than a billion hopes for a better future,
more than a billion ideas to change the world in
constructive ways, more than a billion potential
solutions to the problems of today. With or
without academic degrees, free or determined to
become free, young people are reinventing
culture, taking control of the new media,
recreating how we relate to each other. Yet few of
them are able to enjoy a carefree youth. Most of
them are battling every day against the obstacles
of poverty, unemployment, climate change,
restricted access to education and health care.
How to participate fully in creating the future,
when one is excluded from the decision-making
process? We must help them and support their
ambitions by giving them access to the immense
resources of education, science, culture,
communication and information.
The mighty wind of “Arab Spring” has amazed
us with the capacity of young people to widen
the horizons of possibility. The year 2011 -
proclaimed by the United Nations as International
Youth Year (August 2010 – August 2011) – will be
remembered as the year young people chose to
take up the torch of human dignity.
The Organization immediately mobilized to
provide support to these societies in their
transformation, at a turning point in their history.
In Tunisia and Egypt, UNESCO focuses on training
journalists, distributing educational material,
helping to reinforce freedom of expression and
media reform in view of upcoming elections. I
went there, to Cairo, to hear what the needs were
and to reinforce UNESCO’s intervention in its
areas of competence. The celebration of World
Press Freedom Day on May 3 in Tunis, co-
organized by UNESCO, opened up debate and
led to a major discussion on young people’s key
issues, such as the role of the internet and social
media in the fight against censorship. Last June,
our Organization was the first to launch a series
of seminars in Egypt as a forum for discussion on
civic engagement and democracy
Culture is a strong foundation for the new
democratic society. Young Egyptians proved to
be particularly concerned with safeguarding
their culture during the demonstrations,
spontaneously forming a human chain around
the Library of Alexandria to protect it from
looters. UNESCO wants to encourage this
consciousness among young people, the
collective maturity they displayed. It will support
it in the long term through the “Youth Heritage”
initiative, which will allow the heirs to a unique
heritage to immerse themselves even more in
the ancient values it conveys and to use it as an
instrument of social cohesion and innovation.
In the same vein, I will launch a Heritage and
Dialogue initiative at the next Summit of the
Heads of State of South East Europe that will take
place in Belgrade next September 2011. The Serb
I On her first official visit to
Croatia on 21-22 May 2011,
UNESCO Director-General
Irina Bokova (in white jacket)
opened the first South-East
Europe World Heritage Youth
Forum in Porec, to mark the
International Year of Youth
2010-2011. ©

Editorial
Irina Bokova
L Scene from “Silent
Evolution”, underwater
installation by British
artist Jason deCaires
Taylor, shown during the
2010 United Nations
climate change
conference (COP 16) in
Cancun, Mexico. Young
divers posing with
submerged statues call
attention to a climate
change threat: rising sea
levels.

capital was the theatre of a decisive revolution to
bring democracy to the region: the revolution
led by the young Serbs of the Otpor (Resistance)
movement, which instigated the fall of the
regime of President Slobodan Milošević. More
than10 years after this event, as the region
continues along the path to reconciliation and
democracy, UNESCO wants to give young people
the means to fulfill their ambitions, mobilizing all
the forces of culture to help them shape projects
to promote dialogue and mutual respect. This is
the primary purpose of UNESCO’s Young People’s
World Heritage Education Programme.  
UNESCO was the first UN agency to define
and develop specific youth programmes. World
War II had just ended and UNESCO was already
involved in organizing work camps for young
international volunteers to help in the
reconstruction of Europe. Today it is by
improving the quality of education for all, by
reinforcing protection for pupils and schools in
areas of conflict, by providing better professional
training that we create the conditions for a
brighter future. It is also by helping to establish
ties between young people in different parts of
the world based on shared values of human
rights. For this purpose our Organization has just
produced a short film with the participation of
pupils from UNESCO Associated Schools in
Albania, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada,
France, Indonesia, Lebanon, Uganda and the
Dominican Republic. The scenes of these
schoolchildren freely expressing their views
about gender, diversity, violence and exclusion
provide vital educational material that is
available to secondary schools throughout the
world.
Youth are a force for progress all over the
world. Let us enable them to speak out, to
participate fully in social and political life, to raise
our awareness and open blocked horizons. This is
the goal UNESCO pursues through its Youth
Programme, which supports civic engagement
and social innovation.
A Joint Programmatic Commission on Youth
facilitates cooperation between UNESCO and
NGOs. The Commission is made up of young
people and it is particularly involved in preparing
UNESCO’s Youth Forums. These events have been
held every two years since 1999 to enable young
people to submit recommendations to national
authorities and incite them to implement their
ideas and follow them up, in cooperation with
governments, civil society and the United
Nations system. This year the 7th UNESCO Youth
Forum, 17-20 October 2011, will be a wonderful
opportunity to hear what young people from all
over the world have to say and to discover their
needs and their points of view.
How youth drive change is the topic to be
discussed by the young representatives of
UNESCO’s 193 Member States and civil society.
The culture of peace, good governance and
economic opportunity will be examined from
the perspective of young people’s participation.
Achievements and lessons learned from the
International Year of Youth will also be reviewed,
notably the results of the High-Level Meeting on
Youth organized by the UN in July 2011.
In anticipation of this important event,
UNESCO will launch an on-line preparation
campaign in July, to enable young people to give
their opinions and suggest the subjects they
most care about. The results of these discussions
will nourish the Forum’s debates in October.
UNESCO has always considered young
people key partners in creating a world with
more justice. Youth is always calling on us to
innovate, to invent. Every day brings us more
examples of this positive momentum. I hope this
issue of the UNESCO Courier will inspire
everyone to action. Enjoy reading it! ■

J Graffiti representing a fist,
symbol of Otpor (Resistance),
the Serb youth movement that
brought down President
Slobodan Milošević’s regime in
2000. The symbol was
adopted by young insurgents
in Egypt. Photo taken 8 April
2011 in Mohammed
Mahmoud Street leading to
Tahrir Square, the epicenter of
the revolution in January
2011.
