“Where are you coming from?” was the
question that feminists most often asked
when someone, famous or not, spoke up
in the heated debates of the 1960s.
Where do you come from, to dare to give
your opinion?
Inevitably I am speaking from my
own territory, which in terms of time and
space already has a long history. A
territory totally inhabited by an
imagination built from the boundless
treasure of books, but also mapped
according to the real world, since life has
led me to grapple with existence in
countries passing through crucial
moments in their history. I was lucky,
then, to escape unscathed from the Latin
American continent as it was being taken
over by some of the worst dictatorships.
And I was able to follow, with my own
eyes, the dizzying changes taking place
in Asian countries like China and Japan. 
But I have to say I was never alone in
my travels. I moved amid a galaxy of
exceptional women united by a common
imperative: to observe, speak and create,
no matter what. 



Stars in my 
personal galaxy
She left her native Argentina
in 1974, shortly before the
military junta took control,
and travelled to the USA,
China, Japan and Italy before
deciding to settle in Paris
(France), seven years later.
During those years, an array
of female role-models
sustained her in her
loneliness. Luisa Futoransky
pays tribute to them here.
LUISA FUTORANSKY
I Else Lasker-Schüler : “Der blaue Jaguar und
Freytag” (The Blue Jaguar and Freytag), circa 1928.
© Michael Werner gallery, Berlin, Cologne and New York  

It felt sometimes as if we were going
backwards, but no, it was just that
during difficult times, we were moving
forward like crabs, diagonally.
As I emerged from my own romantic
period, when I was attracted almost
exclusively to artists with sad lives and
tragic endings, like Sylvia Plath,
Alejandra Pizarnik, Camille Claudel and
Charlotte Salomon, I began to admire
the battle of obsessive activists – who
were not always dealt the best hand –
like Janet Frame, Else Lasker-Schüler,
Tina Modotti and Frida Kahlo, to
mention just a few. And also great
travellers like Isabelle Eberhardt,
Alexandra David-Neel, Freya Stark and
Ella Maillart. 
Rereading these lines, I realise that
in my attractions I have gravitated
towards women who were
unappreciated. The ultimate unloved
woman would be Lilith, Adam’s
rebellious first wife, who turns up on the
odd cathedral portico, as part of
superstition, or in literature. I will
illustrate with the examples of two
ambiguous, contradictory figures who
endured long periods of suffering
caused by bodily vicissitudes and
incredible tragedies but who like the
phoenix ultimately experienced
resurrection and vindication. 
Just two women, out of the
hundreds I would have liked to salute.
There is not the space in this article to
talk about the great leaders like Golda
Meir, Bandaranaike – mother and
daughter – Indira and Sonia Gandhi,
Benazir Bhutto, Angela Merkel, Evita,
Michelle Bachelet or Cristina Kirchner.
And, even though I have profound
admiration for the tenacity of Carla del
Ponte and Mary Robinson, or the
courage of Karla Michel Salas and her
tireless campaign to bring the
controversial case of the murdered
women of Ciudad Juárez before the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, I
cannot dwell on them here. I also
cannot say more about Waris Dirie, the
first woman to publicly denounce
female circumcision. This may be
essentially an African practice, but I feel
that her struggle needs to be shouted
from the rooftops, so that even more
people will follow her example. Indeed,
her cause has long been championed
by a centenarian with more energy than
many half her age, Rita Levi-Montalcini,
nicknamed “Lady Neuron”. Every day she
goes to the office of her foundation in
Rome to lend her support to education
programmes for African women. An
asteroid discovered in 1981 bears her
name, an appropriate tribute.
The road to emancipation that
women have trodden for almost a
century has been hard going – and
continues to be fraught with
ambiguities, contradictions, traps and
perpetual confrontations between the
forces of light and those that do their
utmost to relegate us to the kingdom of
darkness. The lives of two writers, two
dazzling stars that I want to extricate
from obscurity here, will serve as
examples – Else Lasker-Schüler and
Janet Frame.
Else Lasker-Schüler, a foreigner in her
own land
I have kept her portrait and her letters
close at hand for years. She was a mix of
contrasting characteristics - surrender
and arrogance, rebellion and submission.
And so much destitution, so much
poverty. But Else was above all an inner
voice, pursuing poetry, her poetry, to its
ultimate consequences. A gift and a
destiny. “Everyone loves my poetry, but
no-one loves my heart,” she used to say
lucidly and incisively.
Else Lasker-Schüler’s life was filled
with paradox. During the Nazi period, the
Germans added her books to the pile to
be burned as examples of entartete Kunst
(degenerate art). And yet only shortly
before, she had been awarded the Kleist
prize, Germany’s highest literary
distinction. In Israel, they didn’t like her
much either, which is to say no one read
her because she wrote in the language of
the enemy, the cursed language. Today,
her “bad motherland”, Germany, where
she was born, and Israel, where she is
buried, are fighting over her, each
claiming that she is “their” national poet,
calling her “the Muse of Berlin,” and “Star
of Weimar,” no less.
L German poet Else Lasker-Schüler, circa 1925.  
© Private collection
The works by Else Lasker-Schüler illustrating this
article are being shown from 21 January to 1 May
2011 at the Hamburg Bahnhof - Museum for the
Present, Berlin. The exhibition is organized by the
Jewish Museum in Frankfurt with the Berlin
National Gallery and State Museum and supported
by the Friends of the National Gallery.

But Else was above all an inner
voice, pursuing poetry, her
poetry, to its ultimate
consequences. A gift and a
destiny.

Else was never satisfied with the
world as it is. She had to transform it,
changing history to suit her. Starting
with herself. She made up her age, her
grandparents’ occupations, the names
of her husband and lovers – the
Sulamite, the Prince of Thebes, Prince
Youssouf, Tino of Bagdhad. But the
reality was more arid, and often the pain
(the premature deaths of her brother
and her only son), the terror (the rise of
Nazism) and the poverty (writing never
earned her enough to live on) lurked
within the damp basements that were
her temporary dwellings. 
A very old bookseller in Jerusalem
who is dear to me remembers coming
across her in the one café where the
city’s insomniacs could go at the time,
Attara. Bizarrely dressed almost in rags,
eccentric as always and with no money
to pay for her modest order, she pulled
some gold foil wrappers from her
blouse and offered them to the irate
waiter as if they were gems or little suns. 
What Am I Doing Here? was the title
chosen by the publisher Salman
Shocken, a refugee in exile in the USA,
for his collected correspondence with
the poet. It contains bitter
recriminations against the earthly
Jerusalem’s harsh climate, its inhabitants’
lack of subtlety and the overall poverty
of its literary and cultural life. 
Expatriate nostalgia was Else’s
greatest sorrow. Her masterpiece, My
Blue Piano, is dedicated “to my
unforgettable friends from the cities of
Germany – and to those who were
driven out like me and are now
dispersed throughout the world. Yours
faithfully!” 
Posterity’s belated judgment
avenged her. On 20 November 2003, in
her acceptance speech for the Nobel
Prize in Literature, Elfriede Jelinek paid
homage to her: “As a schoolgirl I loved
the extravagant, exotic and colourful
personality of Else Lasker-Schüler. I
wanted desperately to write poems like
her, and even though I never did, she
made a considerable impression on me.” 
Janet Frame, at the edge of the
alphabet
In the 1950s, the mentally ill were given
electroshock treatments – Janet Frame
received about 200. Those who
administered the treatments were
conscientious, indifferent or relentless,
but none had any effect on her passion
for writing. 
Literature saved her life. In 1952, she
was at the Seacliff hospital in Otago, New
Zealand, about to undergo an operation.
The diagnosis – later proved wrong – was
schizophrenia. A lobotomy was planned,
to return her to ‘normality’. But just then,
out of the blue, the fairy godmother of
literature appeared – her first book, The
Lagoon and other stories received the
country’s most prestigious prize. 
It was a miracle that the surgeon,
Blake Palmer, and the Otago hospital
administrator happened to read that
very day in the papers that their patient,
Janet Frame, had just received the
Hubert Church Memorial Award.
To situate her in space and time – she
was born in Dunedin on 28 August 1924,
and passed away on 29 January 2004. 
An Angel at My Table, the 1990 film
Jane Campion based on Frame’s three-
volume autobiography, was awarded
the Special Jury prize at the Venice Film
Festival and propelled her into the
limelight. “Until Jane Campion’s film,”
said its subject, “I was known as the mad
writer. Now I am the mad, fat writer.” Her
forte was to scrutinise everything
fearlessly. She never forgot her friend
Nola and all the other women that had
no literary prize to save them from
lobotomies and who were irreversibly
turned into silent and docile zombies. 
L Else Lasker-Schüler: “Prince Yussuf of Thebes”, circa 1928, pastel and chalk, Indian ink, pencil and aluminum on
paper, 26.7 x 21.6 cm.
© Jüdisches Museum Frankfurt am Main. Ursula Seitz-Gray.
I Janet Frame, novelist and poet from New Zealand
(1924-2004).
© Janet Frame Estate/Reg Graham; Janet Frame Literary
Trust; www.janetframe.org.nz 

Janet Frame is the most penetrating
and brilliant woman writer who ever
attempted to explore madness from the
inside. In her books, she defines her self
as a “migratory bird”.
In Faces on the Water, she notes that
total madness or death never come
when we seek or call them. Frame
establishes her voice in another world,
the world of the defeated, on the other
side, behind the bars, the sedatives and
the straitjackets – speaking for the
bodies and minds locked up inside the
prison of the asylum. 
As she was to learn to her cost, there
is a hierarchy among these patients:
there are the “good”, the “crazy” and the
resistant ones like herself who continue
thinking. They are the ones subjected to
electroshock, a trap that springs shut
“on the shadows of the deep”. 
There were five children in the
Frame family – a boy and five girls. Their
father was a railway worker, their
mother a maid, for a while in the service
of the family of writer Katherine
Mansfield.
Tragedy marked their lives several
times – two of the girls died from
drowning, ten years apart. The son had
epilepsy. 
As a child she was rejected because
she was unattractive, and in
adolescence she was mocked for her
excessive shyness. A teacher she was in
love with convinced her to have herself
committed after a clumsy suicide
attempt. She ended up spending eight
years in a psychiatric hospital, “an
imprisoned Now, an eternal Is-Land
without its accompanying horizons”.
Second amazing intervention by the
fairy godmother of writers: at the end of
her hospital nightmare she met Frank
Sargeson, mentor to promising young
New Zealand writers, who satisfied her
hunger for books and persuaded her to
write full time. He set her up in a cabin
on his property in Takapuna, north of
Auckland. A year later she finished her
first novel, Owls Do Cry. Sargeson also
helped her find the money to go on a
visit to Europe. 
London, Paris, Barcelona, Ibiza and
back to London, where she could not
find work because of her history of
mental illness. Once again, stigma, once
again she committed herself voluntarily,
this time to the Maudsley hospital. Third
visit of the fairy godmother in the guise
of the doctor, Alan Miller, who rejected
the initial diagnosis and erased any
trace of schizophrenia. He encouraged
her to undergo psychoanalysis and to
exorcise her past by putting her ordeal
into words. 
As the magic of numbers requires,
having written seven novels, she
returned home seven years later. And so
life goes.
From then on it was a succession of
prizes, grants, writer’s residencies,
distinctions, voyages and honorary
doctorates, but also controversy
surrounding her work and herself. And
periodic nominations for a Nobel Prize
that never came. 
“The edge of the alphabet where
words crumble and all forms of
communication between the living are
useless,” she writes. How true. ■
Luisa Futoransky, born in Buenos
Aires (Argentina) in 1939, wears several
hats: she is a poet, novelist, translator,
journalist and essayist. In English she
has published The Duration of the
Voyage (Editorial Junction Press, San
Diego, USA, 1997). (She has a website,
in Spanish:
tp://www.luisafutoransky.com.ar )
