After the chemical gas industry ran into problems with both the hole in
the ozone layer and then global warming, research has been carried out
to find less dangerous alternatives. Over the past few years, the potential
global warming effect of gases used in aerosol cans, refrigerators and
air-conditioning units has been reduced by a factor of 350.  
Anyone using a pressurized spray-can in 1973
was effectively helping to kill the planet. But no
one knew. A year later, the chemists Mario
Molina and F. Sherwood Roland (1995 Nobel
laureates in chemistry) had found the answer,
discovering that the Freon gas powering aerosol
sprays was destroying the ozone layer.
After that, a young graduate student, Ole
John Nielsen, developed a passion for predicting
the fate of chemicals in the atmosphere. He was
to go on to become a professor at the University
of Copenhagen, a member of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) and ‘chemical fortune teller’. 
According to Nielsen, “They were saying that
these chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were going to
eat away the ozone layer protecting the planet
from ultraviolet radiation. The increase in
radiation would cause cancers… They were
practically announcing the end of the world.
And, being a young and naïve student of
chemistry, I naturally felt I had to study these
compounds, and how they affected the
atmosphere.” 
New diet for the 
ozone eaters
Jes Andersen
Danish journalist and
documentary
filmmaker, meets 
Ole John Nielsen

L It was not until the 1970s
that scientists discovered the
harmful effects of Freon gas,
used in aerosols. 
© iStockphoto.com/Franck
Boston 

The idea that human activity could harm the
Earth’s atmosphere may have been novel in
1974. But by the mid-eighties it was confirmed –
CFCs were creating a hole in the ozone layer
above Antarctica. 
With CFCs also being used in air-conditioners
and refrigerators, millions of tons were being
released into the atmosphere. “Back then, you
just didn’t think about what might happen with
these compounds, or what their effect might be”,
remembers Ole John Nielsen. 
Having said this, the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) was becoming
concerned and was preparing to plug every
suspect aerosol nozzle. As a result, the Montreal
Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone
Layer was opened for signature on 16
September, 1987. Today it has been ratified by
196 states. In essence, this international treaty
declared all compounds threatening the ozone
layer illegal. The death knell had been sounded
for CFCs.
Meanwhile Nielsen had built a reputation
within atmospheric chemistry. He was getting
ready to tackle the “ozone-eaters”. In one year he
and his group had published no fewer than 25
articles on the subject. So, when chemical
manufacturers approached him to test a new
compound that might replace CFCs, he wasn’t
surprised. “We were the right people at the right
time, with the right competencies,” says Nielsen.
The new compound was a hydro-
fluorocarbon, known as HFC 134a. And it really
was less dangerous for the ozone layer, even not
dangerous at all. So, as from 1994, HFC 134a
replaced CFCs in most applications. And for a
while Professor Nielsen thought that he’d better
find himself a new scientific field. 
But the Danish scientist didn’t have to
hang up his atmospheric gloves. The product
that he had pronounced safe for ozone
threatened Earth in a different way.
It turned out that HFC 134a prevents
infrared radiation from escaping from the
planet, producing a greenhouse effect. The
ozone-friendly compound turned out to have
a global warming potential (GWP) some 1400
times greater than CO2.
As it happened, the industry seemed open
to the idea of testing and adopting a better
refrigerant . “I have seen a gigantic shift in
attitude in my time,” says Nielsen. “Nowadays,
if someone wants to produce a compound in
large quantities, they will ask a specialist what
will happen if it is released. That wasn’t always
the case. Of course we also see legislation to
protect the environment, but it is clear that
industries, especially big corporations, are
acting much more responsibly today”.
From 2011, European automobile air-
conditioning systems in Europe will have to
use a refrigerant with a GWP below 150. HFC
134a had a GWP of 1400. Nielsen and his
team, have tested a new compound, HFO-
1234yf, which has a GWP of just 4. This should
help car manufacturers meet European
regulations. 
Next in line, says Nielsen, are bio-fuels.  It
may turn out that ethanol and butanol have
no effect on global warming but, in the
atmosphere they might generate products
that are harmful to man. “If bio fuels are to
replace diesel and gasoline, we’d better be
sure of what they do to the atmosphere
before we use them. And that holds for any
compound released into nature”, he says.  
Ole John Nielsen, is a
professor at the
University of
Copenhagen and a
member of the
Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), which
was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in 2007. He
is a specialist in
atmospheric chemistry.
© Jes Andersen
The idea that
human activity
could harm the
Earth’s atmosphere
may have been
novel in 1974. But
by the mid-eighties
it was confirmed.
