Iron tonic for the
ocean’s anaemia?
Philip W. Boyd
Iron is one of the main elements
taken up by phytoplankton – the
microscopic organisms living on the
surface of the oceans. The iron
encourages these micro-algae to
proliferate, assimilating dissolved
carbon dioxide (CO2) through
photosynthesis as they grow. When
they die, a small, but significant
portion of the carbon remains
trapped in the ocean, sinking to the
bottom, where it is effectively taken
out of circulation. This natural
process is called a “biological pump”
for carbon. 
One idea for limiting global
warming is to use these pumps to
trap part of the CO2 released into the
atmosphere by man since the
Industrial Revolution, by ‘seeding’
the ocean with massive quantities of
iron in the form of micro-particles. 
Why? Because phytoplankton are
anaemic. Although iron is the fourth
most abundant element in the
Earth’s crust, it is very scarce in much
of the remote ocean, too far from the

coast to be supplied with iron from
rivers. In about a third of these remote
waters, the phytoplankton are anaemic,
and just like humans, they do not
function well when they are run down.
Although small, these cells are found
over vast swathes of ocean, so their
collective anaemia has a global
influence, particularly on the climate.
Indeed, healthy phytoplankton produce
more oxygen than all the planet’s forests
put together.
This gave rise to the idea of artificially
‘fertilizing’ parts of the ocean with iron
particles in order to stimulate the growth
of algae. But, between cup and lip… 
Today, a growing number of scientific
experts are sceptical of the wisdom of
adding iron to the world’s oceans in
order to mop up CO2 emissions, and
warn of the possibility of creating
unwanted side effects, far from simply
imitating what Nature does. This ‘seeding’
with iron could lead to vast underwater
areas starved of oxygen (because the
algae take up oxygen that is then not
available for other marine species) and
thus more acidic, while possibly
encouraging the spread of toxic algae. 
Artificially fertilizing the oceans in
the hope of solving rising levels of
atmospheric CO2 is, then, a high-risk
venture that appears to be as expensive
as many other geo-engineering
schemes with much lower risk for
marine resources. These include
‘artificial trees’ consisting of a column
and the equivalent of branches,
designed to capture CO2. 
Philip W. Boyd is a professor in ocean
biogeochemistry at the joint National
Institute of Water and Atmosphere/
University of Otago Centre for Chemical
and Physical Oceanography based in
Dunedin (New Zealand). 

