The work of these three global giants of
poetry, born, respectively, in India, Chile
and France (Martinique), underpins a
new UNESCO project, entitled “Tagore,
Neruda, Césaire: for a reconciled
universal.” It was launched in June 2011
with the objective of inspiring
reflection, in both academic and artistic
milieus, on the universal values of
human society.
“The idea was put forward in 2008
by Olabiyi Babalola Joseph Yaï,
Permanent Delegate of Benin to
UNESCO and Chairman of the
Organization’s Executive Board,” explains
Françoise Rivière, who, at the time, was
Assistant Director-General for Culture at
UNESCO. “He received the backing of
the permanent delegations of Chile,
France and India,” she adds, then sums
up the gist of the project. “The main
objective was to establish a link
between these writers who have
marked their era and the current global
context, and to observe contemporary
problems in the light of their work.”
One of the most acute issues arising
today, which is of particular interest to
the project, is otherness, explains Annick
Thébia-Melsan, one of the project’s



Universal thought
Tagore, Neruda, Césaire
poetry in the service of 
a new humanism
creators. “Our relationship with the
other is no longer a theoretical
question,” says this Aimé Césaire
specialist, who published an interview
with the father of Negritude in the May
1997 issue of the UNESCO Courier. “We
have never regarded our specificity as
the opposite or antithesis of universality
[…]. Our concern has always been a
humanist concern and we wanted it to
have roots,” said the poet from
Martinique, adding “the universal is
reached by a deeper exploration of the
particular.”  
Rabindranath Tagore had said much
the same thing, in his own words, in a
letter to a friend in 1921, “…but by
nature all men are dwija or twice-
born….first they are born to their home,
and then, for their fulfilment, they have
to be born to the larger world” (UNESCO
Courier, December 1961). In a letter to
another friend in 1934 he added
“Individuality is precious, because only
through it can we realize the universal.”
(UNESCO Courier, January 1994). 
And Pablo Neruda, in a lecture given
at UNESCO in 1972, when he was
Permanent Delegate of Chile, said “I am
far from being an individualist – I
believe that man is only free to the
extent that he is a collectivist.” This idea
had appeared in his 1945 poem Song to
the Red Army on Its Arrival at the Gates of
Prussia: “I wanted to sing for you all, for
the whole of the earth, this song of
obscure words, to make us worthy of
the light that is coming.”
NOÉMIE ANTONY and
JASMINA ŠOPOVA
Other areas of convergence have
been identified within the “Tagore,
Neruda, Césaire: for a reconciled
universal” project, which aims to
stimulate thinking on five subjects in
particular: – poetry as mediator
between man and the world; a new pact
between humanity and nature;
emancipation versus all forms of
oppression; a certain vision of the
relationships between science,
knowledge and ethics; and the
educational heritage of these three
writers. UNESCO is also setting up a
sponsoring committee made up of
academics, scientists and artists whose
task will be to oversee the development
of the project and to help establish a
network for research and the exchange
of ideas. “A whole network of partners
has been established to implement this
project,” explains Edmond Moukala, the
programme’s coordinator. “We have
established links with universities,
research centres, NGOs, non-profit
associations, festivals as well as the
media, to plan conferences and
exhibitions and to encourage scientific
research projects and documentary
films.”
“Even though they moved in very different cultural circles, and almost never came across
each other in the course of their lives, the vision of these three giants of philosophy and
poetry converged,” says Irina Bokova, Director General of UNESCO, about Rabindranath
Tagore, Pablo Neruda and Aimé Césaire. 
“Poetry is always like an act of
peace. The poem is born just as
bread is born of the flour”
Pablo Neruda “The revolution in Martinique
will be made in the name of
bread, of course, but also in the
name of the air and poetry”
Aimé Césaire

RABINDRANATH TAGORE
(1861-1941) 
Indian aristocrat, poet, playwright,
musician, painter and teacher, was
awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature
in 1913. His work promotes respect
for cultural and linguistic identity, as
well as the dialogue between East
and West. He tackles the
fundamental questions facing
peoples who have fought for their
political independence.
As socially committed writers who
have helped make history,
Rabindranath Tagore, Pablo Neruda and
Aimé Césaire shared a vision of the
world that was both humanist and
poetic. The task of this project,
dedicated to them, is to challenge
minds in the contemporary world to
think about what humanism means
today. A task defined subtly by the
Haitian poet René Depestre: “This
expedition should lead us from the
homes of each of the three authors
towards other cultural areas and to a
whole, unified universe.” ■
PABLO NERUDA
(1904-1973) 
Chilean poet, diplomat and playwright
committed to the defence and
recognition of American Indian
civilizations. He opposed dictatorships,
oppression, social and racial exclusion,
injustice and economic exploitation.
His work was recognized with the
award of the Nobel Prize in 1971, two
years before his death and the military
coup in Chile.
AIMÉ CÉSAIRE
(1913-2008)
Martiniquan poet, playwright and
politician, is one of the founders of
the Negritude movement. His work is
a virulent critique of colonialism,
imperialism and slavery. He is one of
the great writers on the political and
cultural liberation of colonized
peoples, especially in Africa. 
