MICHAL MEYER
Dreams of
science
Because of the power it bestows on
those who practice it and apply its
results to the real world, science
feeds our hope that planning and
organizing can drive human
evolution to a higher plane. This
has often proved a dangerous
quest.

Science and human identity
Take, for example, the case of
transhumanism, which focuses on
individual rather than societal
improvement. Transhumanism is future
oriented and relies on technologies
both new and as yet confined to the
pages of science fiction books. Its
ultimate goal is to transcend human
biological limitations and so create a
technologically based immortality.
While transhumanism’s technological
origins lie in post World War II
cybernetics, nanotechnology, and
genetic engineering, its essence
connects to the ancient alchemical
quest to create the Philosopher’s Stone,
which supposedly provided near
immortality to those alchemical adepts
clever enough to create it.  
Transhumanism ranges from the
currently realistic to the futuristically
surreal, from stem cell therapy to the
uploading of human consciousness into
machines—at which point it morphs
into a strange religious hybrid.
Transhumanist British thinker Max More
writes that transhumanism is a “blanket
After Victor Frankenstein’s Monster
escaped from the laboratory he went on
a rampage of murder and mayhem. Yet
the Monster had potential for good: He
craved friendship and love and he
helped a starving family. 
Mary Shelley’s1 famous tale is at
least in part the story of responsibility
abandoned. Victor Frankenstein,
scientist, had wished to “pour a torrent
of light into our dark world,” but had
ended by forsaking all moral
responsibility for his creation, which he
abandons in the hope he will forget
about what he has wrought. Out of that
theme has come a long list of
Hollywood mad scientists who seek
power by fleeing from responsibility.
Science (and technology) is power
over the world, and increasingly power
over our biological selves. The
combination of science and humanism
aims to harness science for the
betterment of humanity. Yet we tend to
forget that using science to better the
world is a project as old as science itself.
How we use science in the real world of
today brings up questions of meaning,
values, and responsibility. 

1. Frankenstein: the modern Prometheus, published
in 1818, is British author Mary Shelley’s (1797-1851]
most famous work. 
2. Jules Verne [1828-1905], a French writer, is best
known for his Voyage to the Centre of the Earth
(1864), From the Earth to the Moon (1865), Twenty
Thousand Leagues Under the Sea (1870), and Around
the World in Eighty Days (1873).
L  'Sparkle Man'. Group F. Firework display.
www.groupef.com
© Danica Bijeljac
Verne’s scientific romances2 captured a
wildly progressive view of science, with
such wonderful creations as deep-sea
submarines and ships to the moon.
Science dazzled the human imagination
and grounded a universal belief in
human progress, both moral and
material. But a darker side of that
term given to the school of thought that
refuses to accept traditional human
limitations such as death, disease and
other biological frailties.” 
Other older examples have also
given science the power to influence
what it means to be human. In the
second half of the 19th century, Jules
imagination emerged towards the end
of the 19th century. In the United States
a potent brew of cultural fears − high
immigration, cities as hotbeds of
depravity, evolution and degeneration −
intersected with the scientific
knowledge of the day to create
eugenics. 
The goal of the eugenicists was to
put science into the service of bettering
the human stock, and, indeed, some
appeared to regard humans as similar to
livestock when it came to avoiding

‘negative’ traits. In the U.S. and Britain,
eugenics was often class- and privilege
based, with the middle and upper
classes considered to be biologically
superior. For a while eugenics was
mainstream, subscribed to by scientific
humanists like the great science-fiction
author H. G. Wells,3 who was concerned
about species immortality.
Portraits of the ‘perfect’ scientist
Other scientific humanists, such as
George Sarton,4 one of the founders of
the discipline of the history of science
took a more benign (though still elitist)
approach. In 1924, in an article on ‘The
New Humanism’5 published in Isis, he
wrote that science is the “fruit of an
international and ageless collaboration,
one single organized body, the
common treasure of all peoples, of all
races; in fact, the only patrimony upon
which they all have equal rights.” For
Sarton, humanity’s true purpose is in
the “creation of new values, intellectual
values; the gradual unveiling and
unfolding of the harmony of nature, the
development and organization of what
we call art and science.” Yet again,
science was given power over values
and meaning. 
Another universalist, Morris Goran,
writing in The Journal of Higher
Education in 1943 described his perfect
scientist in a politically utopian vision:
“He will belong to mankind at all times,
serving human values, eternally vigilant
for transgressions, and policing society
against tyranny, intolerance, and
despotism . . . The threat of one
moment’s refusal by the scientists of the
world to do the bidding of tyrants
would forever ensure peaceful solutions
of world problems.” This is the scientist
as philosopher king, whose knowledge
of science gives him power and moral
authority. 
3. Herbert George Wells [1866-1946], English writer
of science fiction, is best known to readers for The
Time Machine (1895), The Invisible Man (1897) and
The War of the Worlds (1898).
4. George Sarton [1884-1956], the Belgian born
American historian, is known primarily for his 3-
volume Introduction to the History of Science. 
5. This article was originally published in 1918, in
Scientia, in French.
6 George Perkins Marsh [1801-1882], was an
American diplomat and philologist.
L Microscope photos of stem cells taken in 2001 by the Généthon laboratory in Evry (Génopole) in France.
Using science to better the world
is a project as old as science itself.

In the 1970s, science and humanism
finally clashed when they intersected in
sociobiology. In this new discipline,
evolutionary theory was applied to
social behavior in animals and humans.
Extreme forms of biological
determinism argued that the social
status quo reflected biology. Society, in
effect, was being forced to mirror the
science of the day. Applying biological
determinism to male aggression, female
subjugation, or lagging IQ scores
among African Americans suggested an
unchangeable reality of inequality and
inferiority. 
Paleontologist and evolutionary
biologist Stephen Jay Gould fought the
determinists through such popular
books as The Mismeasure of Man (1981).
For Gould, humanity shared a common
genetic heritage, on top of which
existed significant social and cultural
differences. G. P. Marsh,6 the man who
first sounded a warning about
humanity’s environmental impact on
the natural world, beginning in the 19th
century, believed that science and
technology would solve the problems
created by humans, but in that solving
would create new problems. 
We will need both science and
humanism to work together in the
future. We should also learn from past
mistakes. We must not expect from
science that it will provide us with
ultimate meanings. It cannot tell us who
we should be and it cannot tell us what
“better” means. Science is a human
creation, and it has the meaning and
purpose that each generation gives it.
Responsibility and ethical behavior
should be central to the choices we
make. ■
Science cannot tell us who we
should be and it cannot tell us
what “better” means.
Michal Meyer was born in Israel. She
has worked as a meteorologist in New
Zealand and Fiji and as a journalist in
Israel. She has a Ph.D. in the history of
science and has worked for the
Chemical Heritage Foundation since
September 2009. She is the editor in
chief of Chemical Heritage magazine
(www.chemheritage.org/discover/ma
gazine/index.aspx)
