What could be better than to plant a
tree that feeds the villagers while, at the
same time, it provides the material to
waterproof the tatas ? 
Working under the umbrella of the
Togolese NGO FAGAD (Frères
agriculteurs et artisans pour le
développement) and supported by the
Patrimonito project and CCIVS, these
young World Heritage volunteers have
identified and planted various
endangered plant species used in the
construction of the tatas. Within two
years, the site acquired 1,050 new trees
in a 2000 m2 area. A first step, providing
the necessary materials to restore the
tatas using traditional methods. 
But besides the tangible aspects of
Tamberma culture – another name for
the Batammariba – the volunteers
wanted to help preserve its intangible
aspects too, by becoming associated
with the first Tamberma Festival, from
26 to 30 March 2011. “This is the first
year the Festamber festival has been
held,” explains Atti Y. Tata, a 23-year-old
Togolese man who runs a camp that
hosted seven volunteers this year. “We
were very excited at the idea of taking
part in this new initiative, which
showcases the richness of our local
culture, languages, crafts and farm
products.”  These jewels, along with the
tatas, make Togo a stop not to be
missed on a cultural tourist’s itinerary in
West Africa. “For people who do not
know anything about this culture, which
was my case, this festival is a very good
way to get immersed in it in just a week,”
enthuses Linda Gustafssona, 24-year-old
Swedish volunteer. “I really hope it will
keep going, because it also gives the
Tamberma an opportunity to appreciate
the wealth of the Koutammakou site in
a new way.”
Based in Adeta, the young
volunteers were not daunted by the 400
km journey to Koutammakou. With no
vehicle at their disposal, they did the
best they could: “We travelled by taxi,
bus or motorbike, depending on the
state of the roads,” says Atti. Indeed, the
project is still a work in progress. “We
were supposed to help with
preparations for the festival, but by the
time we got there, there was hardly
anything left to do,” says Linda. But even
if it takes time to build up momentum,
what counts is the will to discover and
simply to get involved. ■
Patrimonito, a cartoon character representing a young
guardian of world heritage, made his appearance in 1995.
He is the mascot of World Heritage volunteers, taking his
young companions to Africa, Latin America, Asia and
Europe. The young volunteers take part in the preservation
and appreciation of emblematic World Heritage sites,
under the supervision of the World Heritage Centre and the
CCIVS*. 
K Atti Y. Tata, in  Koutammakou (Togo).
* CCIVS – Coordinating Committee for International
Voluntary Service
If the hundred-year-old tata mud
houses of Togo had arms, they would
reach out to hug these young people,
just like grandmothers hugging their
grandchildren. For the past four years
volunteers from Togo, Sweden, Japan,
and South Korea have been meeting up
in Koutammakou, a World Heritage site
in northeast Togo, to look after these
fragile old ladies. 
The tatas – traditional, tower-
flanked mud houses – seem to embody
all the wisdom of the Batammariba
people. But they are crumbling under
the weight of modernisation, with its
quick and easy building codes. And
Nature is not helping them either,
leaving a sad scene of collapsed houses
after the rainy season in August and
September. And even the Nere tree,
whose bark is used to make whitewash
for the walls of the tatas, is becoming
scarce.
That is where the young volunteers
decided to start. Just like the tree,
whose symbolic name means “it is
good” in Bambara, and whose roots
sometimes reach 60 feet underground
to find water and provide a harvest of
fruits packed with goodness, these
young people also went to the source.



Patrimonito
in Togo
KATERINA MARKELOVA
