The feminist struggles of past decades often reduced men to enemies, to be fought with any
possible means. Today, Italian women are mobilizing side by side with men, in order to keep
their precious gains and to make new demands, such as equal pay for equal work and
flexible working conditions that do not lead to precarity.  
‘We didn’t expect it.’ This was the first
answer that the organizers of the
demonstrations on 13 February 2011
gave to those persons who asked them
to comment on their initiative. The
organization in just a few days of a
national day of action, which succeeded
in spreading all over the world, must
have seemed an enormous challenge at
first. Everything started with a clear and
categorical movement of indignation,
which affected a very varied group of
women, who were members of the Di
Nuovo association and who had been
involved in the defence of women’s
rights for a long time. Several hundred
thousand people responded to their
call, one million according to the
organizers. Women who took to the
streets with their partners, their fathers,
their sons and their brothers, in order to
clearly make a stand for the
emancipation of Italian women. ‘Every
one of us made phone calls and
contacted their networks, and in no
time we got enthusiastic replies from
everyone’, said the young poet Elisa
Davoglio.
The slogan of the demonstration, ‘Se
non ora quando?’, which is a clear
reference to the title of a novel by the
famous Italian writer Primo Levi (1919-
1987) – ‘Now or Never’ in English –
clearly expressed the brutal degradation
of the depiction of woman in the media
and in Italian politics. The malaise that
led to this protest found its roots in the
erosion of gains that Italian women
thought were permanent, the fruit of
the struggle for civil rights and the
equality of the sexes in the 1960s and
1970s. This period of political struggle,
which forged an entire generation of
Italian feminists, seemed to have led to
major victories: family law was radically
modified (with the authorization of
divorce in 1974) and women obtained
the freedom to decide about pregnancy
(thanks to the abolition of a particularly
restrictive abortion law in 1981). The
fervour of those years seems to have
gradually died down during the
following decades, which saw a major
divide developing between the first
generation of Italian feminists and their
daughters and granddaughters. 
Let’s start again together 
Comparing this era to the current
mobilization of Italian women,
Francesca Izzo, a lecturer in the history
of political doctrine at the University of
Naples ‘L’Orientale’, observes how this
movement ‘very quickly built bridges
promoting communication between
the generations’, as a result of mutual
recognition. ‘On the one hand, the
generation that fought in the 1970s
became fully aware that their gains
risked being seriously challenged if they
did not find the courage to speak up
while recognizing the errors of the past.
On the other hand, the young
generations finally understood that the
rights and benefits which they had
enjoyed without realizing it were
threatened with disappearance. Having
reached that point, we said to ourselves:
‘Let’s start again together’.
GIUSY MUZZOPAPPA
Italian journalist
K The demonstration "Se non ora quando" in the Piazza del Popolo, Rome, Italy, on 13 February 2011
© Grazia Basile, Rome

Together, and with men. Elisa
Davoglio is very clear about this point:
‘Men gave us very precious assistance.
The mobilization was born in a climate
of sincere cooperation and spontaneous
sharing of reasons for indignation.’
Francesca Izzo goes further and
identifies a radically new aspect of this
issue compared to former feminist
movements: ‘Above all, young  people
could not understood, and rightly so,
the demands of the feminist struggles
of past decades, which often reduced
men to enemies to be fought by any
means. Young women today have the
same fears, frustrations and aspirations
as men of their ages, and they often feel
fragile and inadequate. They would
never support a mobilization where
only women had the right to feel
indignant.’ Cristina Comencini, the film
director and writer, who, with her sister
Francesca, contributed to organizing
the demonstration, noted, ‘it is the first
time that men have been on an equal
footing with women and have taken to
the streets side by side with them to
show their political and human
strength.’ 
A political contest 
‘Italy is not a country for women’ is
another slogan that was found on many
banners in the streets of Italy and
elsewhere. Cold hard statistics confirm
this. According to the 2010 OECD report
about education in the world, women in
Italy study more than men (they
represent 61 % of graduates), but have
great difficulties in entering the job
market. According to the report Salari in
Italia, 2000-2010: il decennio perduto
(Salaries in Italy, 2000-2010: the lost
decade) by the CGIL, the main Italian
trade union, it also appears that their
salaries are 12 % lower than those of
their male colleagues, on average.
According to the 2010 report by ISTAT
(National Institute of Statistics), the
female inactivity rate – i.e. the
percentage of women who are not
working or studying – is 48.9 %, which is
the highest level in the European Union
after Malta. The presence of Susanna
Camusso, the first woman secretary-
general of the CGIL, on the podium of
the Piazza del Popolo in Rome on 13
February is therefore even more
symbolic. Working conditions, the right
to choose between a professional career
and motherhood, the right to equal pay
with men,  the right to flexibility which
does not lead to lifetime precarity -
these are the issues in the political
contest started by the movement ‘Se
non ora quando?’ .
The discrediting of women’s roles in
society goes hand in hand with the
monstrous and deformed depiction of
women in the mainstream media. Last
year, a documentary by the women’s
rights activist Lorella Zanardo, entitled
‘Women’s Bodies’, made a considerable
impact: no Italian woman who saw it
can forget the grotesque atmosphere of
this montage of extracts from the
television programmes that are shown
on every Italian channel every day. The
idea of women being just bodies for
consumption has profound
repercussions, above all on younger
generations. It is precisely this which
enables the organizers of the
mobilization to ask deeper questions.
‘We launched this call in order to say
that it is not the country we want’, said
Elisa Davoglio. ‘To attain  this, we
decided to make the first move and
avoid any exploitation of our message,
by circulating it on our networks via
Facebook and by creating a blog from
which we could launch a debate that
was not controlled by the traditional
media.  We asked everyone to leave all
political and group membership
symbols at home, and we chose to
spread the message and guidelines
ourselves, with clear and simple words,
so as to prevent the traditional media
from taking over our mobilization in any
way.’
What are the next steps and the
next problems that the movement will
decide to face? The question remains
open. ‘There is no lack of objectives’, said
Francesca Izzo, ‘but we must know how
we want to attain them. Democracy is
fundamentally a constant struggle
between objectives and means. The
issue of women’s rights is at the heart of
the major crisis of democratic
representation. The enormous task in
front of us consists in reorganizing
democracy, an objective which needs
determination and patience.’ The
women in the ‘Se non ora quando?’
movement want to reclaim the 8 March,
International Women’s Day, which has
lost its meaning in Italy. Elisa Davoglio
concludes: ‘It is not just about
celebrating the fact of being a woman
for one day, about being given flowers,
or even about going to the restaurant. 8
March speaks about rights, work and
emancipation.’  ■
L Scene from the demonstration “Se non ora quando”. Piazza del Popolo, Rome, Italy, on 13 February 2011 
© Grazia Basile, Rome
