We often wonder what takes our lives in
one direction or another. In my case, it
was a serious illness as a child that kept
me bedridden for several months,
hovering between life and death.
During this long period of solitude, my
reading and meditation turned into
arduous lessons that strengthened my
spirit and my personality. 
After several years of struggle, I got
well again. I felt that I had to use the
second chance I had been given and
devote my life and work to achieving
change and progress for the poorest of
the poor. 
The vocation I had chosen as a child
– architecture – is usually seen as being
far removed from the disadvantaged
members of society. It is most often
linked in peoples’ minds to the prestige
and fame of a few architects and their
spectacular, extravagant buildings. I
wanted to change this old-fashioned
and obsolete image of the impact
architects can have on society. That is
why I wanted to devote myself entirely
to the development of projects and
research in sustainable architecture,
new technologies, climate change and
the response of architecture to
mitigating natural disaster risks. 
After years of hard work, I graduated
at the top of my class from San Agustín
d’Arequipa national university, in my
home town in Peru. This was my first leg
up the ladder. Then, a few months later, I
had the opportunity to participate in an
international competition on
environmental initiatives. With the
support of my mentors, I prepared a
project to rehabilitate the Arequipa river
basin, with the aim of preserving
farming there, while encouraging
participatory tourism in the agricultural
areas. 
My project won an award and I was
given a trip to Germany to attend an
environment conference for young
adults, organized by Bayer. I was one of
about 100 young environmentalists,
What can be used to store
water, for overwintering, as
a shelter, an igloo, a water
mill, canoe or a raft? Hard to
find an answer? Yet the
object exists. It is made out
of recycled plastic bottles
and steel cables and is
called an ‘ecocylinder’. Its
inventor, the 26-year-old
architect Carlos Bartesaghi
Koc, explains why he
created this object and
many others.
This article was written in collaboration with Tunza,
the youth magazine produced by the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
See: http://tunza.mobi/

K Panoramic view of  “Systemic Agrotourism”
project with “self-built shelters”, 2009
© Carlos Bartesaghi Koc
Green
architecture

CARLOS BARTESAGHI KOC

farming with participatory tourism. In
the former case, local inhabitants
provide free accommodation for tourists
who, in exchange, help out and learn
ancestral farming methods. The project
also calls for “self-built shelters”, which
are buildings made by farmers using
recycled materials and refuse produced
in urban areas. The second project is an
urban design for new tourist circuits
inside the famous sillar (volcanic rock)
quarries in Arequipa. Once they are set
up, these circuits will create new jobs,
while protecting and improving health
and safety conditions for quarry
workers, who risk illegal expropriation. 
At the moment I am working on a
project for an urban waste treatment
plant for Arequipa (for my qualifying
thesis), which will include a proposal for
a controlled landfill site and its eventual
landscaping into a park. The project
includes a plant for sorting inorganic
waste and a compost production unit.
The workers who are there now
informally will get official contracts
along with better health, hygiene and
safety conditions. They will be offered
training opportunities, childcare and
leisure facilities on the same site.
Children and young people will be able
to visit a waste dump museum and use
educational materials inside the factory.  
In the near future, I hope to
continue teaching and to develop low-
cost, environment-friendly architecture.
I would like to help bring more justice to
the world and make it a place more fit
for humans and nature. ■
Carlos Bartesaghi Koc’s websites:
http://www.wix.com/carlosbartesaghikoc/cbk)
http://issuu.com/carlosbartesaghikoc/docs/archit
ecture_portfolio_2005-2011  
gathered together to discuss scientific
and cultural means to combat climate
change effectively.
It was thanks to this trip that I also
started to write for Tunza, the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
youth magazine. And that is how I was
able to exchange opinions and
experiences with many other young
people around the world, which turned
out to be a fantastic source of inspiration
and motivation. 
I went on to organize exhibitions,
events and campaigns; I gave lectures
and was taken on as an assistant at the
university. Working with a local NGO, I
was able to design some larger-scale
social and environmental projects. These
led to me to travel throughout the
Peruvian sierra, where I saw the poverty
and social disintegration that are
increasing daily in our country. 
Innovative technologies
This experience confirmed my long-
standing conviction: in emerging
countries like mine, we must use very
low-cost technologies that can be
adapted to different social, cultural and
economic contexts. This is how the idea
for the ‘ecocylinder’ came about, for
example – a multifunction shelter made
out of recycled plastic bottles and steel
cables, fitted together  into sheets and
stuck on top of one another. This
cylinder can be used and adapted in a
thousand different ways, according to
local needs and weather conditions. It
can be used to store water, for
overwintering, as a shelter, an igloo,
water mill, canoe or raft. 
Other projects, like Systemic
Agrotourism and Quarry Ecotourism, are
part of the same original idea of linking
LK The ecocylinder invented by Carlos can be used
and adapted in multiple ways according to location,
need and climate conditions.
L Peruvian architect Carlos Bartesaghi Koc making
presentation as a “Young environmental envoy” for
Bayer in 2007 in Leverkusen (Copyright Bayer AG)
