Building citizenship. That’s how I
define my experience as a United
Nations volunteer. I recently
participated in the campaign “Unite to
end violence against women”
launched by the United Nations
Secretary-General. I helped set up
discussions on several social networks
to make Bolivians more aware of this
serious problem. One lesson I learned
from this recent six-month experience
- young volunteers are extremely
committed and professional. We are
young professionals who are eager to
learn and to help build social justice.
creativityWonders of
Youth volunteering can achieve so
much. Offer young people role models
and inspire them with a new outlook,
and their creativity pays dividends.
Take youth seriously, give them
responsibility and a place in society
based on trust, and they excel.
Volunteering empowers young
people to act and change the world
around them. In 2010, the United
Nations volunteering programme
deployed in 132 countries nearly 8,000
people from 158 countries. It
mobilized another 10,000 volunteers
who contributed to development
through the on-line volunteering
service. About 62% of them were from
developing countries and 80% were
young people between the ages of 18
and 35.
The year 2011 marks the 10th
anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers. It is also the European Year
of Volunteering- yet another reason for
young people to exercise their right to
community participation. ■
United Nations Volunteers site: http://www.unv.org/en.html
Kenyan Scout Josephat Gitonga,
28, takes community service very
seriously. He treats it almost as a
“sacred duty”, which has earned him
recognition from the Kenya Scouts
Association and the job of director
of the Scout centre in his town,
Embu, located about 120 km
northeast of Nairobi. Passionate and
hardworking, Josephat threw
himself into this adventure by
reaching 200% of the objectives!
With the support of his Norwegian
counterparts, he succeeded in
opening the centre to the
community and making it practically
autonomous financially, though a
hostel and restaurant micro-project
that also created jobs.
Initially the centre planned to
hold only occasional scouting
activities. But Josephat dreamed of
turning Embu into a global village.
Never had the international Moots –
the big meetings of the oldest group
of Scouts, age 18 to 25 – been
organized in Africa. It was time to
take action.
Relying on the experience that
built his reputation among Scouts all
the way to Asia and Latin America,
Josephat quickly persuaded the
Kenya Scouts Association to
nominate his town as one of the
three Kenyan locations for the 13th
World Scout Moot (27 July-7 August
2010). The dream became reality:
more than 1,000 young world
citizens arrived in Embu, which had
never known so much friendship,
laughter and brotherhood as well as
discussion on today’s major
challenges. ■
Pierre Arlaud, Swiss student, 25;
Representative, External Relations at
the World Organization of the Scout
Movement. worldbureau@scout.org
Volunteering is perfect for tapping
into the idealism and drive of young
people. Despite appearances, our lack of
experience due to our young age is an
easily overcome obstacle. In addition to
its social value, community participation
through volunteering can be a means
for us young people to get our first
experience in the ethical principles on
which the dignity of individuals and
societies depend. This kind of
participation turns us into solution
makers, a force for development instead
of a vulnerable group. ■
Silvia Bellón, Spanish student, 23
K Opening of the Scouts' 13th World Moot in Kenya, on 27 July 2010.
