Today, beneath the buildings of the
European Organization for Nuclear
Research, which has kept its historic
acronym, is the world’s largest particle
accelerator. Some 27 kilometres in
circumference, the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is a gigantic instrument,
equipped with 9300 magnets.
On 30 March 2010, news coming out
of CERN set the world talking – LHC had
succeeded in colliding beams at close to
the speed of light. “With this
experiment”, says Rolf-Dieter Heuer,
CERN’s Director-General, “we got to
within a fraction of a second of the Big
Bang. “It’s a new step forward, opening
areas of research into the Creation of
the universe that we could never have
imagined before.”
The historical discovery of 30 March
was made possible through the “Atlas
Collaboration” which brings together
around 3000 physicists (including 1000
students) from 40 countries, and
belonging to over 170 universities and
laboratories. This an entire “virtual
nation”, to use an expression often
Few people today remember that the
idea of creating a European Council for
Nuclear Research (CERN) was mooted in
1950, in Florence (Italy), at the fifth
session of the UNESCO General
Conference.  At that time, the world was
still licking its wounds after the still
recent Second World War. European
intellectuals, men and women of the
arts and scientists had all understood
one thing – that cooperation was
essential for the construction of peace.
What was needed was a common
project around which European
researchers could join together, coming
from both Allied countries and the Axis
powers.
The Florence project was to enter
into force three years later, with the
signature of the final Convention on the
creation of CERN (the ‘Council’ having
metamorphosed into ‘Centre’). The
Convention was ratified by 12 countries1
in 1954 and the first stone of the
building was laid, just outside Geneva
(Switzerland), in 1955.
Postscript
Fostering scientific cooperation, making science education
more attractive, facilitating access to scientific knowledge
for a fairer world – these are common objectives being
pursued by UNESCO and the European Organization for
Nuclear Research, better-known by its historic acronym,
CERN. The two organizations have been closely linked for
60 years. 
Jasmina Šopova meets ROLFDIETER HEUER, Director-General of CERN



UNESCO and CERN : 
like hooked atoms
1. Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, Yugoslavia.

heard at CERN. “Motivation – and this
alone – can explain the success of this
gigantic undertaking. Although we
come from different regions of the
world, we’re all moving in the same
direction  – towards knowledge,” says
the Director-General. If, one day, we
discover the famous Higgs boson – a
hypothetical particle dubbed The Grail
by physicists, because they’ve all been
searching for it for half a century – it will
be thanks to the Atlas. “We know
everything about this particle,  except
whether it exists,” he says, smiling.
CERN is not alone in pursuing this
quest, though. There is also Fermilab,
just outside of Chicago (USA). “Today,
CERN has the most powerful accelerator
in the world, but until recently it was
Fermilab, and they have amassed a
huge quantity of data over 25 years,
whereas we have just begun. LHC was
only launched in September 2008. But,
having said this,” confides Rolf-Dieter
Heuer, “I think that, with it, we have a
good chance of beating them to the
discovery of the Higgs boson.” Do the
two organizations collaborate? “I call it
competitive collaboration or
collaborative competition. Fermilab
helped us a lot when the LHC went
down, [shortly after it opened].” And do
they exchange data? “Not for the
moment. Come back in a few years and
ask me that question again.” 
“There is no progress without
competition,” says Rolf-Dieter Heuer.
“Nor without cooperation.” This was at
the origin of the birth of CERN and
remains its driving force, but it is also
one of the permanent ideals of UNESCO.
And one of the Organization’s recent
projects is to support the Synchrotron-
light for Experimental Science and
Applications in the Middle East
(SESAME) centre in Allan (Jordan). In
terms of international scientific
cooperation, SESAME is the Middle
East’s equivalent of CERN. It brings
together Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt, Iran,
Israel, Jordan, Pakistan, the Palestinian
Authority and Turkey. “We don’t have
the same fields of expertise,” explains
CERN’s Director-General, “but the idea of
using science for peace underlies both
projects. And CERN has not shied away
from helping create SESAME, especially
in terms of expertise.” 
In the framework of common
initiatives (SESAME, virtual libraries in
African universities, training teaching
staff, etc.), CERN puts its expertise at the
disposal of UNESCO, while UNESCO’s
International Basic Sciences Programme
(IBSP) offers the European Organization
a framework for cooperation with
researchers from countries that are not
its members. Indeed, CERN has 20
Member States, but its projects include
10,000 associate experts from 85
different nationalities. 
CERN also counts on UNESCO to
help it promote the idea of a new
approach to teaching physics and
mathematics on an international scale.
“We can no longer continue to teach
physics starting with theories
developed in the 18th century!” protests
Rolf-Dieter Heuer. “Current research on
the universe, for example, is very
appealing to young people. Schools
should start by stimulating their
curiosity and then gradually move on to
the basics. CERN cannot develop a
method that would suit all countries,
but it can raise awareness and train
teaching staff from all over the world.
And UNESCO can convince political
leaders that we absolutely have to make
science subjects more attractive to
pupils in secondary school, so that they
are not turned off.” The struggle could
be a long one. “I know, the battle is not
going to be a walk-over. But if we don’t
start with a battle, we have already lost!”
Basic science is another area where
the objectives of the two organizations
coincide. Decision-makers often
perceive basic science as too abstract,
because there may be no immediate
applications for its results. But for Rolf-
Dieter Heuer, this is nonsense.
“I define basic science as open
research with a focus on results, but not
Rolf-Dieter Heuer, a German physicist,
took over as Director-General of CERN
on 1 January 2009. He took up his post
just as the Large Hadron Collier (LHC)
started operating.
J The Universe of Particles exhibition aims to help
visitors to CERN understand the major issues in
contemporary physics. © UNESCO/J. Šopova
L Three years after the idea for CERN was first
conceived, the Convention for its creation is signed on
19 July 1953, at UNESCO. 
© UNESCO
with a focus on application. Imagine if
you had asked Wilhelm Röntgen to
invent a machine to photograph your
skeleton! He would never have come up
with radiation. And yet, without any
preconceived ideas, he discovered, in
1895, the X-rays that still underlie
modern radiography.” There is no lack of
examples to illustrate Heuer’s
conclusion – “We never know when or
how a result of basic science will be
applied. But it always is, in the end,
either directly or indirectly.” 
There is no progress without
competition – nor without
cooperation.
We never know when or how a
result of basic science will be
applied. But it always is, in the
end, either directly or indirectly.
©
 C
ERN
