Davos Man is a very particular kind of
beast. Powerful, worldly and often very
rich, he tends to be more familiar with
stock market prices than supermarket
prices and has all the right accessories: a
villa on the Côte d’Azur, a private jet on
call and a pet philanthropic project.
Davos Woman is worldly, wealthy
and influential, too. But mostly, she is
scarce.
Women attending this annual Alpine
schmoozefest of the global super elite
find themselves in a peculiar place: They
are members of that elite — but
relatively recent members with a
minority status.
Female participants still account for
only 16 percent of the total at the World
Economic Forum. Indeed, with so many
of the women shuffling through the
snow in their fur coats being spouses,
those who aren’t can easily find
themselves mistaken for one: “At a Davos
cocktail party people tend to assume
you’re a ‘wife’ rather than a C.E.O.,” said
Françoise Gri, the president of Manpower
France, who has made Fortune
magazine’s list of 50 most powerful
women in the world for the past seven
years. It is her second time in Davos.
“It still feels a little like a white men’s
club,” she said. “As a woman, one doesn’t
entirely feel like one belongs.”
Christine Lagarde, the French finance
minister and a Davos regular for over a
decade, described how “the male-
dominated chemistry” at the forum used
to affect her confidence. “You know
you’re competent, you’ve looked at your
files, but somehow you feel inhibited,”
she said.
Female elites do not live in a bubble
It is tempting to think about the rich and
powerful as a gender-neutral group that
operates in a borderless bubble of
privilege and whose disconnect to the
everyday lives of the middle classes in
their respective home countries has only
been exacerbated by the current
economic crisis.
But unlike many of their male peers,
women at the top have something
powerful in common with their less-
privileged sisters: “Gender equality is a
concern that cuts across the class divide,”
said Dominique Reiniche, who heads
Coca-Cola Europe. “Women at all levels
have a common cause.”
That helps explain why the rising
phenomenon of female philanthropy
often focuses on seeking to improve the
lot of less-fortunate women, said Jacki
Zehner, vice chairwoman of the Women’s
Funding Network and the first female
trader to make partner at Goldman
Sachs. Entertainers including Angelina
Jolie [USA] and Annie Lennox [UK] – both
recent Davos attendees – promote
women’s rights for the United Nations or
other organizations.
There are other elements that put
women perhaps less at risk of living in a
hermetically sealed bubble.
Even rich and successful mothers
tend to bear primary responsibility for
the children. That can hold back careers
or make the work-life balance
particularly hectic. But they stay more in
touch with society: they have the
primary relationships with nannies, often
women from more disadvantaged (and
perhaps immigrant) backgrounds. They
speak to teachers and interact with
mothers of their offspring’s friends.
They are also more likely to help with
child-related practical tasks, like birthday
parties and shopping. (“There is nothing
like teenage daughters to keep you in
touch with the world,” said Ms. Reiniche,
a mother of three girls.)
Often, female elites lack the sense of
entitlement among male elites, said Ms.
Lagarde. “Women, for all sorts of
historical, cultural and economic reasons,
have a tendency to stay more connected
with the real world,” said Ms. Lagarde,
herself a mother of two boys.
“I don’t know many men at that level
who would go to the supermarket to do
their own shopping, but I do,” she added.
Among others who do the same, she
said, are Anne Lauvergeon, chief
executive of the nuclear giant Areva;
Chancellor Angela of Germany; and
Lubna Olayan, a Saudi businesswoman.


Davos Forum:
women are the future
Last January’s World Economic Forum in Davos (Switzerland) brought together some 35 heads
of state and government and 2,500 decision-makers, and only 16% of them were women.
Nonetheless, the rate of women’s participation has practically doubled since 2001 and
according to Ben Verwaayen, one of the Forum’s founders, the future of Davos depends on it.
, KATRIN BENNHOLD, German journalist at the International Herald Tribune
This article is reprinted by courtesy of the
International Herald Tribune. Entitled “Women Make
Their Mark at Davos, Though Still a Distinct
Minority”, it appeared in the supplement “The
Female Factor” on 26 January 2011.

Even rich and successful mothers
tend to bear primary
responsibility for the children.
That can hold back careers or
make the work-life balance
particularly hectic. 

Being out of touch with the real world
is one of the most serious charges leveled
at the elites – and elite institutions like
the World Economic Forum.
Gender equality: a must-have
accessory
If Davos wants to remain relevant in
the decades to come, women need to
feature much more not just on the
participant list but as speakers
throughout the program, said Zainab
Salbi, founder of the humanitarian
organization Women for Women
International and one of the World
Economic Forum’s Young Leaders.
“I know many women who already
talk about no longer coming to Davos,”
she said ahead of this year’s meeting.
“The forum was a great 20th century
event, now it needs to prove that it is fit
for the 21st.”
Or, as Ben Verwaayen, chief
executive of Alcatel-Lucent and a
member of the forum’s foundation
board, put it: “Gender equality is about
future-proofing your organization — it’s
a license to be there.”
The sense of urgency has certainly
grown in recent years, particularly since
a French businesswoman who was
reportedly fed up at not being invited to
Davos set up a Women’s Forum in
Deauville, France.
The share of women participants in
Davos has almost doubled since 2001.
Women-related events, once relegated
to the early breakfast slot off-site, now
occupy prime slots in the main Congress
Center. There are receptions, dinners
and cocktails dedicated to female
networking.
This year, for the first time, forum
organizers agreed a 20 percent female
quota with their 100 top partner
companies, insisting they send at least
one woman among their five delegates
or forgo the fifth place. The quota has
more than doubled the number of
women sent from these companies.
Because it affects only 500 of the 2,500
participant slots, it hasn’t increased
overall female attendance, but it is, say
organizers, about as much as they can
force the issue.
“As a foundation that draws its
individual membership from the world’s
leading thousand businesses, we reflect
their gender balance,” said Saadia
Zahidi, Head of the forum’s Women
Leaders and Gender Parity Program.
Soon women might be getting help
from a very Davos corner: Nicole
Schwab, daughter of the founder of the
World Economic Forum, is introducing a
gender equality certificate to
companies that live up to (yet to be
defined) standards on equal pay, female
representation and employee
satisfaction with gender equality.
“The objective is that this certificate
becomes a competitive advantage for
companies who need to attract talent
and compete for investments,” said
Aniela Unguresan, Ms. Schwab’s partner
at The Gender Equality Project.
Now the elites just need to be
convinced that along with the yacht and
the yoga guru, a gender equality label is
a must-have accessory. ■
L One of the women participants at the Davos World Economic Forum, January 2011.
© World Economic Forum/swiss-image.ch/Michael Wuertenberg

If Davos wants to remain
relevant in the decades to come,
women need to feature much
more not just on the participant
list but as speakers throughout
the program
