Editorial
Irina Bokova
“To be female in this place is to be an open wound
that cannot heal. Even if scars form, the festering is
ever below,” wrote Toni Morrison1 in   “A Mercy”,
which to me is one of the most poignant novels
ever written about being a woman. The lives of
four women – European, African, Native American
and a mysterious young girl who comes out of the
sea – are intermingled, all of them tragic,
inextricably linked to each other and deeply
rooted in the soil that would a century later give
birth to the United States. These four powerful
female characters stand like caryatids supporting
the emerging American society. And yet, the
author says, they are “open wounds”. Is it the
common fate of women throughout the world to
be both the pillars and the victims of society?
Obviously the situation of women has
undergone considerable evolution. The
International Council of Women (ICW), founded in
1888, followed by the International Alliance of
Women (IAW) in 1904 and the Women
International Democratic Federation (WIDF) in
1945, have played a crucial role in the struggle for
gender equality.
Gender equality lies at the heart of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, which are
essential for the dignity of individuals, for healthy
societies, and for the rule of law. Second, equality
between men and women is a powerful
accelerator of political, social and economic
transformation. Gender equality is a core
development issue. It is also a security issue. Girls
and women suffer disproportionately from armed
conflict. They are also very often the best
advocates for reconciliation. Finally, the last
hundred years have taught us that gender
equality is everyone’s job. Governments are key,
but so are civil society and business, teachers and
administrators, cultural personalities and the
L “Ames“ (Souls),
sculptures by
French artist Hélène
Hiribarne.
© Alicia Cloeren, Texas
1. American novelist Toni Morrison won the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 1993. 

I Irina Bokova visiting
the Tombs of Buganda
Kings at Kasubi (Uganda)
with the Ugandan
Minister of Education and
Sports Geraldine
Namirembe Bitamawire
and the Permanent
Delegate to UNESCO
Elizabeth Paula Napeyok 
© UNESCO/Tosin
Animashawun

media. The international community plays its part
by setting goals and mobilizing support to reach
them.
UNESCO seeks to tighten the link between
gender and the internationally-agreed
development goals. We made this case in 2010
during the 15th anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women in Beijing. We took it to the
Millennium Development Goals Summit in New
York last September. Working with the Republic of
Korea, we pushed education higher on the
agenda of the G20 summit in Seoul. I made the
same argument at the 2011 World Economic
Forum in Davos. Throughout all of this, we worked
closely with the United Nations Girls Education
Initiative and we will continue with the newly-
created UN Women, led by Michelle Bachelet.
Gender equality is woven through the work of
all UNESCO sectors. It has inspired me in
reforming the Organization itself. It guides our
activities on the ground – including in difficult
settings, in Afghanistan and Iraq as well as in
Pakistan. During my recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of Congo, I signed an agreement with
the Government to establish a research and
documentation Centre on Women, Gender and
Peace-building. Located in Kinshasa, this UNESCO
Category 2 Centre will address an issue of vital
importance for human rights, social stability and
development for the Great Lakes Region.
Remembering a visit in the 1980s to
northwest Zimbabwe, her country of origin, Doris
Lessing said, “That poor girl trudging through the
dust, dreaming of an education for her children,
do we think that we are better than she is - we,
stuffed full of food, our cupboards full of clothes,
stifling in our superfluities? I think it is that girl,
and the women who were talking about books
and an education when they had not eaten for
three days, that may yet define us.”2
Beyond the limits of her fiction, the author
was reaffirming her faith in women, even the most

disadvantaged. UNESCO has other ways of
reaffirming the same faith. Beyond the limits of
her fiction, the author was reaffirming her faith in
women, even the most disadvantaged. UNESCO
has other ways of reaffirming the same faith. To
empower the world’s poorest girls and women,
we will launch a new initiative on girls’ education
that will engage official and private sector
partners This will focus on the innovative use of
new technologies to expand basic education and
literacy, on the education of women and girls in
situations of conflict and natural disasters, and on
system-wide policy frameworks and teacher
training. To empower the world’s poorest girls and
women, we will launch a new initiative on girls’
education that will engage official and private
sector partners This will focus on the innovative
use of new technologies to expand basic
education and literacy, on the education of
women and girls in situations of conflict and
natural disasters, and on system-wide policy
frameworks and teacher training.
There has been progress. The 2011 Education
for All Global Monitoring Report shows that
gender parity has improved in primary enrolment
since the start of the decade, especially in
countries that featured the greatest gaps. But
disparities have increased at the secondary level,
notably in Africa. And while women are making
breakthroughs in higher education in all regions,
they still account for only 29 percent of
researchers. The share of illiterate women has not
changed over the last 20 years: women still
represent two-thirds of the world’s 796 million
illiterates.
The French writer Antoine de Saint Exupéry
once wrote, “If you want to build a ship, don't herd
people together to collect wood and don't assign
them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long
for the endless immensity of the sea.” A longing for
the endless immensity of the sea has guided us
since 1911. It still inspires us today. ■
2. Doris Lessing’s acceptance
speech for the 2007 Nobel
Prize for literature 
