On 4 October 2010, disaster struck in Hungary. In
the aluminium plant operated by the company
MAL near the town of Kolontár, 160 kilometres
from Budapest, the walls of a reservoir gave way.
A two metre-high torrent of red toxic sludge
poured out, burying people and houses in its
wake. Nine people died, 150 were injured.
Several hundred thousand tonnes of toxic sludge
contaminated 40 square kilometres of land. The
sludge was a waste product of the aluminium
production process and hazardous because it
contained highly caustic sodium hydroxide as
well as toxic heavy metals such as mercury,
arsenic and chromium. 
In recent decades, chemical accidents have
repeatedly been the cause of worldwide horror
and dismay – and the apocalyptic images of
them have had a lasting negative effect on the
chemical industry. In 1976, dioxin gas was
released from a plant operated by Icmesa, a
subsidiary of Roche, in Seveso, a Northern Italian
town near Milan. The gas cloud, thousands of
times more toxic than potassium cyanide, left a
trail of death and destruction – plants shrivelled,
The chemical industry is one of the most important in the world, worth
a staggering US$3.6 trillion a year. For decades it was not interested in
sustainability or protecting the environment. But after major disasters
such as Bhopal and Seveso, attitudes have begun to change. Instead of
dirty chemistry, green chemistry is now all the rage all over the world.
Jens Lubbadeh
German 
correspondent for 
The UNESCO Courier
and journalist for 
Greenpeace Magazine
L The main principles of
Green Chemistry, which
emerged at the end of the
1980s, are to avoid producing
waste, to lower energy
consumption, improve
production efficiency and
explore renewable resources.
©123rf.com/Michal Rozewski

trees were defoliated, thousands of animals
perished. Pictures of children’s disfigured faces
and workers wearing gas masks and white
protective clothing went round the world. Eight
years later, there was an even more horrific
accident in India. Forty tonnes of highly toxic
Methyl isocyanate gas escaped from a factory
belonging to the US chemical giant Union
Carbide (now a subsidiary of Dow Chemical) in
the Central Indian town of Bhopal. Several
thousand people died and up to half a million
are still suffering from the after-effects of the
disaster today. Bhopal is considered to be the
most serious chemical accident to date. Two
years later, Europe became a victim again, when
a warehouse near Basel belonging to the
chemical giant Sandoz (now Novartis) went up in
flames. Toxic pesticides poured into the Rhine,
turning the water red for hundreds of kilometres;
tonnes of dead fish drifted down the river.
Nº1 polluter
Kolontár, Bhopal, Seveso, Sandoz. The reasons for
these disasters are almost always the same –
negligence, sloppiness and human error. And
almost always the companies try to cover up and
play down the causes and the consequences of
the accidents. The results are similar too –
devastated countryside, vegetation destroyed,
dead animals and, in amongst them, workers in
their protective gear, looking like aliens. The
general public is increasingly worried about
these invisible deadly dangers, now not just
radiation but chemicals, too. This lay behind the
establishment of the environmental movement
in the 1970s and 80s. More and more often, the
practices of the chemical companies are now
exposed – simply pouring their toxic waste into
the environment or dispatching it to poor
countries. In the eyes of an increasingly
ecologically aware public, the chemical industry
has become number one polluter. The word
“chemical” has become synonymous with “toxic”.
Today, products use the “chemical-free” tag to
boost sales. Within just a few decades, a dramatic
change in image has taken place. In the 1950’s,
nylon, plastic and Persil washing powder stood
for progress. By the 1970s and 80s the image of
the chemical industry was as dirty as its origins.
The Ancient Egyptian word kemi originally
referred to the black soil of Egypt, but also to
black eyeliner (kohl) [see p. 15]. In Arabic, kemi
became al-kimia, or alchemy [see p.13]. This
occult pastime had turned into a proper science
by the 18th century and, from the 19th century,
one of the most important industries in the

L In March 2010, a hundred
tonnes of dead fish filled the
Rodrigo de Freitas lagoon, in
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). There
were several possible causes,
including discharge of sewage
carrying toxic industrial and
domestic waste. The
proliferation of algae is due to
an excess of nitrates and
phosphates, which could have
suffocated the fish.
© M.Flores – UNEP/Specialist
Stock
In the 1950s,
nylon, plastic and
Persil washing
powder stood for
progress. By the
1970s and 80s the
image of the
chemical industry
was as dirty as its
origins.

world. This is when today’s global players were
founded: BASF, Bayer, DuPont and Roche. The
chemical industry manufactures over 70,000
different products, from plastics and fertilizers, to
detergents and drugs. Its total global annual
production is worth a breath-taking US$ 3.6
trillion, according to the American Chemistry
Council (ACC). It has dramatically changed and
improved our lives. It is impossible to think of
modern-day civilisation without it. 
But after a century-long success story, the
chemical industry, inflated by mechanised mass
production, has become the cause of a growing
number of ecological problems. It is enormously
resource- and energy-hungry; many solvents and
catalysts are toxic, disposal of its waste is
complicated and expensive, while toxic and
carcinogenic substances are released into the air
and water. According to the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), Western
Europe produced a total of 42 million tonnes of
toxic waste in the year 2000, five million of which
were exported in 2001. 
Green chemistry
The careless disposal of toxic waste was for a
long time tolerated or concealed by politicians –
the chemical industry was too important for the
economy. But after Bhopal and Seveso, they had
to respond – in the 1980s and 90s chemical
companies had to meet increasingly stringent
environmental requirements. In 1990 the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
passed the Pollution Prevention Act, marking a
change of direction in policy. Manufacturing
processes and products had to be made
sustainable, pollution was to be avoided – dirty
chemistry gradually started to turn green. “After
defining the term ‘green chemistry’ in 1991 it
became clear that a design framework would be
desirable for those wishing to put the theory of
green chemistry into practice”, says Paul Anastas,
who is regarded as the “Father of Green
Chemistry”. He is the director of the Center for
Green Chemistry at Yale University and also
works for the EPA. In 1998 he published the
“Twelve Principles of Green Chemistry” along
with his colleague, Jack Warner. The first of these
principles dictates that “it is better to prevent
waste than to treat or clean up waste after it has
been created.” Also, harmless alternatives are to
be found to toxic chemicals and solvents. The
latest milestone on the path towards green
chemistry was the European Union’s 2007 REACH
Directive (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation
and Restriction of Chemicals). Now it is no longer

T H E  U N E S C O  C O U R I E R  . J A N U A R Y  M A R C H  2 0 1 1 . 3 7

up to the authorities to demonstrate to
manufacturers that the substances they use are
potentially harmful; the shoe is on the other
foot. Thanks to REACH, some 40,000 chemicals
now have to be tested. 
Other goals of green chemistry are to lower
energy consumption, to improve the efficiency
of the production process and to switch to
renewable resources. After all, the chemical
industry also depends on petroleum,
consuming 10% of global oil production to
make 80% to 90% of its products. And the
chemical industry is energy-hungry: in 2008, for
example, the German chemical industry
consumed some 12.5% of the entire national
demand for energy. Since the 1990s the industry
has increasingly been pursuing the goal of
sustainability – while improving its image at the
same time. BASF, the world’s largest chemical
corporation with annual sales of 50 billion euros
and more than 100,000 employees around the
world, like other giants, DuPont, Dow Chemicals
and Bayer all want to become greener. “At BASF
we are running all our activities according to the
principles of sustainable development,” says
BASF CEO, Jürgen Hambrecht. And, he adds, “we
are developing products that help our
customers to save energy and resources, while
improving quality of life.” These are primarily
insulating materials that enable home-owners
to lower their heating costs and reduce carbon
emissions.
BASF publishes its carbon emissions, not
only for its own production facilities but for the
entire life cycle of its products – from the
extraction of the raw materials through to final
disposal. The company’s website reveals that
the production of BASF products led to the
overall release of some 90 million tonnes of CO2
into the atmosphere in 2010 – corresponding to
10% of Germany’s total CO2 emissions. By the
year 2020, BASF wants to lower its production-
related greenhouse gas emissions by 25 %
(compared with 2002). But since the production
process only accounts for part of the total, this
reduction target only represents 7.5 % of BASF’s
total emissions. 
Even so,  Hambrecht emphasises that BASF
products themselves also reduce carbon
emissions – a total of 287 million tonnes of CO2
per year, or three times as much as is released
during their manufacture, as the company
website proudly announces. Also, BASF
promises to implement the REACH directive by
2015, and to reduce the amount of organic
compounds, nitrogen compounds and heavy
metals released into air and water by some 70%
by 2020. On its website, BASF claims to have
already done so. And the company is on the
lookout for renewable resources, such as using
natural castor oil in the manufacture of
mattresses, and the biodegradable plastic Ecovio,
which is largely made from polylactic acid,
derived from maize. 
Green chemistry is not only booming in the
West. “Recently, there has been growing support
for and interest in green chemistry in developing
countries”, says Paul Anastas, who recently
addressed the Pan African Chemistry Network
(PACN), which he helped to establish, at the first
Green Chemistry conference. In emerging
nations, like India and China, he adds, “green
chemistry has been implemented in academia,
research institutions, and industry at a much
faster rate than anywhere else in the world.” It
seems that these countries do not intend to
make the same mistakes as the West. 
