Editorial
Irina Bokova
Humanism is an age-old promise, as well as an
idea that is always new, endlessly reinventing
itself. The humanist project has been part of our
history since Antiquity, yet it shines like new in
every epoch. In the early years of the third
millennium the word can no longer have the
same meaning as it had during the Renaissance
in Europe, when it was forged on the image of
the ideal man, master of himself and the
universe. It also goes beyond the meanings that
the Enlightenment philosophers gave it, and
which have remained, despite their universalist
aspirations, restricted to a Eurocentric vision of
the world.
Respect for cultural diversity is a core element of
21st century humanism. It is a vital constituent
during these times of globalization. No single
culture has a universal monopoly. Each and every
one can contribute to the consolidation of our
shared values. 
The current threats to the planet’s precarious
ecological balance, the ethical problems raised
by digital and biomedical technologies, the
economic and political crises –these are all
global challenges that demand concerted
responses. The humanism that is emerging today
has to provide a framework for our common
thoughts and reflections on global issues. 
And, beyond the theory, humanist values have,
above all, to be translated into practice, in every
facet of human activity. The adoption of the
Millennium Development Goals in 2000
constitutes a humanist agenda par excellence. A
central preoccupation is the promotion of
women’s rights and gender equality. Humanism
today also has a feminine side. 
Humanist values form the very foundations of
the philosophy of UNESCO. Written into its
constitution, they have been guiding the actions
of our Organization for 65 years, in the
promotion of a peace that is “founded upon the
intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind.”
Building a responsible world of solidarity is a
long-term endeavour that has to draw on all the
creative forces of humanity. Culture, education,
philosophy, science, information technology, law,
and international cooperation provide us with
the means. Building the ramparts of human
dignity in everyday life is not a Utopian quest.
Humanism is a promise we must all keep.
I Irina Bokova, 
Director-General of
UNESCO, at the
Organization's
headquarters, in
February 2010, during
the first meeting of the
High Level Panel on
Peace and Dialogue
between Cultures. In
March 2011, the Panel
met again at the UN
headquarters in New
York, to discuss New
Humanism for the 21st
Century. ©

Beyond the theory, humanist values
have above all to be translated into
practice.
