scientific relations between countries which
possess not only most of the organic substances,
but also the knowledge – often non-scientific –
surrounding these resources, and those countries
wishing to use them for industrial purposes. A
new page has turned in the history of the
exploitation of the extraordinary chemodiversity
of so-called ‘megadiverse’ countries. 
Chemodiversity is one component of
biodiversity. Secondary metabolites – alkaloids,
lignans, terpenes, phenylpropanoids, tanins, latex,
resins and the thousands of other substances
identified so far – which have a whole host of
functions in the life of plants, are also playing a
crucial role in the development of new drugs. 
And, although we are living in the era of
combinatory chemistry, with high-speed
screening and molecular engineering, we still
continue to turn to nature for the raw materials
behind many medically and economically
successful new treatments. Nature has provided
over half of the chemical substances that have
been approved by regulatory bodies across the
world over the past 40 years. 
Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani is Professor of
Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry-UNESP,
(Araraquara, Sao Paulo, Brazil) and Past
President of the Brazilian Chemical Society
(2008 - 2010) 

Since the Earth Summit (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
1992), the exploitation of natural resources and the
socio-economic benefits of bioprospecting have
become increasingly poignant issues. One of the
principal goals of the Convention on biological
diversity, which was adopted at the Summit, is “the
conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable
use of its components, and the fair and equitable
sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization
of genetic resources.” But bioprospecting, which
consists of making an inventory of the
components of biodiversity with a view to
ensuring their conservation and sustainable use,
has, on the contrary, not ceased to be misused to
further the interests of industry, which often
patents the substances as they are found. 
The tenth Conference of Parties to the
Convention, held in Nagoya (Japan) in October
this year, will change the picture, though, as it
reached a legally binding agreement on the fair
and equitable use of genetic resources. As from
2012, this Protocol will regulate commercial and
Nature has
provided over half
of the chemical
substances that
have been
approved by
regulatory bodies
across the world
over the past 40
years. 



The primacy of
nature
Vanderlan da Silva Bolzani
L The Kallawaya are an
itinerant community of healers
and herbalists living in the
Bolvian Andes. The Andean
Cosmovision of the Kallawaya
was inscribed in 2008 on the
Representative List of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage of
Humanity.
© UNESCO/J. Tubiana
