Like other Global Public Goods, gender equality represents
long-term collective benefits that run up against short-
term special interests. UN Women, the new United Nations
entity for gender equality and the empowerment of
women, is called upon to surmount the main obstacles to
adequate investment in girls and women.
In the context of the international
economic downturn combined with the
food, energy and environmental crises,
the reflections on “global commons” and
finding global responses have gained a
new momentum. Yet while there is an
extensive literature on Global Public
Goods (GPGs)1, gender equality and
women’s empowerment are
conspicuously absent in these
discussions, despite the fact that it will
be impossible to achieve global
economic growth, accountable
governance and peace when half the
world’s population – women – are kept
outside of the global agenda setting
process. 
Investments in girls and women are
all the more important at a time of
budget constraints when only
investments with a high rate of return
and a significant multiplier effect are
placed on the agenda of donor
countries. The time has come to change
the perspective of development
funding, or international development
assistance. Altruism and geo-politics
must give way to a vision of provision of
utility for all. Girls and women must no
SANIYE GÜLSER CORAT and ESTELLE RAIMONDO



Gender
equality
a global public good
1. Global Public Goods have universal benefits and
require collective action at the international level
for their management. The environment and
human rights are examples of GPGs. 
longer be viewed as victims of
marginalization from the “mainstream”
development efforts but as critical
actors and agents of change who can
add significantly to the overall
productivity of national, regional and
global economies.
We know that women spend, on
average, 90% of their earnings on
education, health and the nutrition of
their families and communities while
men invest only 40% of their earnings in
these areas. Recent evidence
demonstrates that at the corporate
level, increased numbers of women in
top management positions tend to have
a positive effect on the performance of
companies and on their stockholders’
level of trust. Finally, at the macro-level,
evidence also shows that the simple fact
of having women in the workforce has a
positive impact on productivity. 
Gender equality in the political
realm, i.e. women’s inclusion in political
decision-making structures and
processes along with men, also has
powerful spill-over effects. At the local
level, for example, quotas for women in
the Indian Panchayat (local
government) show that women leaders
are more effective in delivering public
goods such as drinking water
infrastructure than their male
counterparts.

Rwanda provides a good example of
this correlation. Rwanda’s constitutional
reform imposed a minimum of 30%
representation for women in the
national parliament. Female members
of Parliament succeeded in putting
health and education at the top of the
Rwandan national agenda. The fast rate
of growth of the country is also
intrinsically linked to the active
participation of women in the labour
force in general (80 per cent) and as
heads of enterprises in particular – they
head 42% of enterprises in the formal
sector and 58% in the non-formal
sector.
In rare instances, such as in Liberia
or Guatemala, where women
participated in formal peace building
processes on an equal footing with
men, peace negotiations became more
constructive, inclusive and sustainable. 
Gender equality as GPG becomes
even more straightforward when the
Millennium Development Goals are
considered. Gender equality is critical
for achieving gender parity in
education, reducing child mortality,
improving maternal health and
eradicating poverty and hunger, as a
majority of the poor are women. As for
environmental sustainability, how can it
the “free-riding” by holding international
institutions and governments
accountable for their commitments such
as to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.2
Last but not least, it can surmount the
time inconsistency obstacle by putting
pressure on the Member States and
institutions to honour their obligations.
The new United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN Women) has the
potential to play this crucial role
provided that it has vision and strategic
leadership, sets an agenda and course of
action accepted by the major
stakeholders, and is equipped with the
requisite human and financial resources
to fulfil its responsibilities. ■

A graduate of Bosphorus University in Istanbul (Turkey), Saniye Gulser Corat (left)
obtained a doctorate in political science from Carleton University in Canada, where
she was also a professor before becoming the Director of the Division for Gender
Equality at UNESCO.
Estelle Raimondo holds a Master’s degree in development economics from
Columbia University (USA) and one in international affairs from Sciences Po (France).
She is an Assistant Program Specialist in the Internal Oversight Service at UNESCO.
2. The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
resulted from the Fourth World Conference on
Women in 1995.

L Increasing the number of women executives
improves the performance of companies.
© Den_Bar pixburger.com 2011
be achieved if women, who constitute
the majority of those who safeguard
biodiversity, are kept at bay? Finally, how
can a global partnership for
development be achieved if women
either absent or are grossly under-
represented in policy and
decision-making?
What measures can be put in place
to ensure that gender equality
circumvents the fate of other GPGs
regarding “under-provision”? There is a
need to modify the incentives to
overcome three major obstacles: lack of
coordination among actors; “free-riding”
– letting others provide the good while
one enjoys its benefits; and time
inconsistency and public choice, as
gender equality is not at the top of the
agenda of election platforms. 
The United Nations as a system has
significant comparative advantages. It
can overcome the coordination problem
as it is mandated to serve as a platform
for Member States to come together and
address global issues. It can overcome
