Currently there are 27 full-time
academic staff and eight technicians in
the chemistry department. In the
present academic year (2010-2011),
there are 1121 undergraduates studying
chemistry, 81 postgraduates registered
for an MSc and 45 PhD candidates.
Department staff are engaged in
research areas such as the analysis of
trace and heavy metals (see page 21),
biosensors, the chemistry of natural
products, green chemistry,
electrochemistry, computational
chemistry and several other fields of this
complex science.
The department buildings cover an
area of some 2800 m2, with 25
laboratories and 13 associated areas.
Chemical and hardware stores occupy a
further 700 m2. High-grade instruments
for research and teaching include a 400
MHz NMR spectrometer, a high
performance liquid phase chromato -
graph, a Fourier Transform Infrared
spectrometer, an ultraviolet/ visible
light spectrophotometer and Gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) facilities. 
While the overall image of our
department is positive, there are still a
number of constraints affecting the
teaching and research activities,
including inadequate safety provisions,
too many students, inadequate
laboratories for undergraduate
instruction, poor administrative support
for research, the prohibitively high cost
of chemicals and scientific equipment.
Most research is carried out with the
very limited funds the department
receives from the university. Some
research projects do receive funding
from foreign organizations, such as the
Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (SIDA/SAREC),
International Programme in the
Chemical Sciences (IPICS), the British
Council Development Partnerships in
Higher Education (DelPHE) programme
and the International Foundation for
Science (IFS).
Another constraint is the lack of a
data analysis centre. We are very often
obliged to send samples abroad for
analysis, with obvious delays for
students, whose research has to be
completed in a limited time frame. 
Shimalis Admassie is Head of the
Department of Chemistry at the
University of Addis-Ababa, Ethiopia.

Studying
chemistry
in
Ethiopia
Since 1950 the Ethiopian university system has been trying to fill the country’s need for
high-level chemists. In just 17 years, a simple unit of the University College of Addis-Ababa
has become a full-fledged department of the Haile Selassie I University, offering a
Bachelor of science (BSc) degree in chemistry. In 1978 the department launched a Master
of science (MSc) programme in chemistry with four specialization options: analytical,
inorganic, organic and physical. A PhD programme was launched in 1985.   
© DRShimalis Admassie
