Humanism, as it appeared in the
Renaissance, resulted from a merging of
revived classical Greek thinking, with its
sense of the primacy of man over the
Earth, consolidating man as a being
apart from the rest of nature –
separated and dominant. This vision not
only prevailed, it was reinforced by the
absolute domina tion and
transformation of nature by man.
While this humanism has gained
ground, it nevertheless began a course
of dehumanization. The atomic bomb
alone is a symbol of the creation of a
schizophrenic civilization. The human
being dominated nature, using the
technology that he created, but
humanity started to be dominated by
technology that now defines the
characteristics of the social system,
destroying the environment and
increasing social inequality.
The uncertain future of our planet
means that we will have to rethink the
humanist project, which, for me must be
built on seven pillars.
Promoting planetary politics
What the city meant to the Athenians
has, today, become the nation state for
modern democracies. And citizenship –
this Greek creation that indicated the
commitment of city resi dents to the city
If, nowadays, value has been transformed into price, and a tree is only worth the timber it
produces, or an animal its meat and leather, it is, according to Cristovam Buarque, because
the humanist project has lost its way over the centuries. For a new form of humanism to
emerge that is founded on ethical modernity, it must take account of the planetary
challenges we are facing.
CRISTOVAM BUARQUE
This article is an extract of a presentation given by
Cristovam Buarque at the Third Global Forum of the
Alliance of Civilizations in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in
May 2010.

Seven pointers for the future of©

"Moon Game", photograph
by Laurent Laveder

itself - began to turn into a commitment
to the whole country.
The present planetary crisis raises the
issue of our responsibility as citizens of
the Earth. In other words, it calls for an
individual commitment to the fate of
humankind and of the Earth. For me, this
new humanism must be sensitive to the
importance of all human beings, to the
feeling of global solidarity. 
Respecting cultural diversity
In the past, man has been contemptuous
of his fellow men, as witnessed by the
genocide against indigenous peoples of
America, the enslavement of Africa and
all the other forms of racism and
xenophobia that reveal a sense of
superiority. A new humanism must get
rid of ethnocentrism; it must become
‘acentric’ and respect cultural diversity.
We must calm the conflicts between
cultures and consider their variety as an
indicator of the wealth of civilization,
where their interaction is more than the
sum of the parts.
Caring for the environment
Humanism has been irresponsibly
arrogant with regard to nature, seeing no
value in it. It has exhausted natural
resources and undermined the
ecological balance to such an extent that
the continuity of civilization is
threatened. Only human labour or a price
set by the market generate value on a
threatened and worthless planet. The
value of trees is in its timber, that of
animals in its meat and leather. 
The new humanism that I am calling for
should seek a civilization that is fully
integrated into the environmental
balance. Economic output should no
longer be measured only by the sum of
material goods and services - GDP. It
must also take into account any costs
due to waste resulting from the
production process.
Guaranteeing equal opportunities
Humanism was an oasis for the dream of
equality, but capitalism widened
inequalities to such an extent that
differences in life expectancy now
depend on personal income. I dream of a
humanism that ensures equal
opportunities, that will act as a ladder for
social ascent, drawing ecological lines to
define the limits on a consumption that
is depleting the environment, while
protecting the dispossessed.
Promoting balanced production
The idea of valuing labour, instead of
land, made man the value-maker and
put workers at the centre of the
production process. However, this great
leap worked against humanism when
the value was transformed into a price
defined by mystical market forces
beyond human control. Explanations
replace justice, demands replace will,
and consumer desires replace the
fulfilment of needs. To build a new
humanism we must redefine the march
of nations and of humankind towards
an ecologically balanced production
process. And it must assign value to
non-tradable goods. 
The new humanism must also
abolish the slavery that continues to
imprison man by reducing him to a
mere cog in the production process.
Integration through education
Humanism in the industrial era
promised a world of equal income,
thanks to the economy. Capitalism said
that the increase in production and the
laws of the market would lead to a
‘trickle down’, distributing the income
from top to bottom of the social
pyramid; whereas in socialism, the
distribu tion would be ensured by the
state and the laws of planning.
Nowadays, under the new
knowledge and human capital
economy, the key to economic progress
and social justice must be sought in
quality education for all. The challenge
of the new humanism is to ensure that
each child has access to equally good
education, regardless of race, family
income or place of residence. The ‘trickle
down’ promised by capitalism will no
longer come from the market, but
instead from a ‘trickle up’ induced by
education.
The long-term purpose of this
process will be the integration of all
peoples around the world, using all
available techniques in a planetary
network.
An ethical technical modernity
The industrial process of civilization is
characterized by the pursuit of
technical modernity, defined by the use
of up-to-date technology. This required
the creation of an economic rationality
that justifies the products of cutting-
edge technology and leaves behind the
social goals, thus relegating ethical
values.
The new humanism must use ethical
values as vectors that set up the social
goals, and will see them as the
foundation of an economic rationality
that defines all technical choices. Even
here, techniques should be chosen
according to ethical and aesthetic
standards, not only in terms of
economic efficiency.
Technical modernity, defined by the
originality of technology and
humanism, will be replaced, in the new
humanism, by an ethical modernity. For
instance, instead of being defined by
the number of private cars in
circulation, modern transportation
would be judged by its results –
reduction in travel time, user comfort,
punctuality, universal access.
Like Einstein trying to dialogue with
God – in whom he did not believe – to
learn how he had drawn all the details
of the world, the new humanism must
imagine the ideal way to build a
civilization that is democratic, tolerant,
efficient for humanity and each human
being, and that respects nature. The
only way is dialogue between people
and between men and nature. The new
humanism will promote the dialogue
between cultures and Mother Earth. ■
Cristovam Buarque is a Senator and
Professor at the University of Brasilia,
and was Minister of Education in 2003.
He has devoted his political career
particularly to combating illiteracy,
implementing agrarian reforms,
improving the Brazilian health system
and improving working conditions in
the country.
Nowadays, under the new
knowledge and human capital
economy, the key to economic
progress and social justice must
be sought in quality education
for all. The challenge of the new
humanism is to ensure that
each child has access to equally
good education, regardless of
race, family income or place of
residence.
