drugs can be encapsulated and released slowly.
Similarly, alginates are used in dressings, to absorb
wound fluids.
Marine algal extracts, such as fucoidan, have
great potential for further development as
products in the nutraceutical (from "nutrition" and
"pharmaceutical") and pharmaceutical markets.
However, one of the greatest challenges ahead for
the use of these types of ingredient, is sourcing
high quality seaweed.  With decreasing water
quality through heavy industrialization, it is
becoming increasingly difficult to find seaweed
that has low levels of toxins, such as heavy metals.
The other great challenge is to use this resource in
an environmentally sustainable way, so that the
biodiversity of the marine ecosystem is
maintained. 
Vicki Gardiner is a member of the Australian
Academy of Science and is Honorary General
Secretary of the Royal Australian Chemical
Institute (RACI).  She is Manager of Innovation
and Product Development at Marinova Pty Ltd
and is the RACI Convenor for the 2011
International Year of Chemistry. 
Soon after the archaeological site at Monte Verde
(Chile) was discovered in 1977, samples of nine
different seaweeds were found in a healer’s hut,
dating back over 14,000 years.  And, 17,000
kilometres away, in the Okinawa archipelago
(Japan) the health benefits of a brown seaweed
have long been known. It turns out to contain
fucoidan, which is rich in sulphated
polysaccharides (natural sugars).
Over the past 30 years, some 800 scientific
papers on fucoidan and other marine
polysaccharides have confirmed what the
Japanese have known for centuries – it is a
powerful anti-inflammatory and anticoagulant,
which blocks certain viruses and boosts the
immune system. And very recent research shows
that fucoidan-based products can also reduce the
symptoms of osteoarthritis of the knee.
Nowadays, a number of drugs and nutritional
supplements contain algae or their extracts. Whole
dried, milled kelp is used for its iodine content,
while agars and alginates have gelling properties.
Agars, which are extracts from red seaweeds, are
also commonly used as microbiological culture
mediums for identifying infectious agents, and in
proprietary laxatives.  Alginate salts form gels, a
property that makes them useful in patches, where

Seaweed for health Vicki Gardiner
Very recent
research shows
that fucoidan-
based products
can reduce the
symptoms of
osteoarthritis of
the knee.
K Wakame, or sea fern, is an
edible seaweed very popular
in Japan.
© Ian Wallace
