
KHALED YOUSSEF was interviewed by Khaled Abu Hijleh


Revolution
one of the great feats of
civilization
He does not deny the accusation that his films helped to incite the January 2011 Egyptian
revolution, but he does not claim any of the credit. For Khaled Youssef, co-director, with
Youssef Chahine, of “Chaos” (2007), the “Arab Spring” extends across generations and
borders. In this interview he offers his vision of the events and their consequences for the
arts, society and international politics.
Khaled Youssef at
UNESCO for the
screening of his
film "Chaos", 13
April 2011.
© UNESCO/Michel
Ravassard


T Every generation
played a role in
this revolution,
even those that
are no longer
with us.

You are one of the eminent people who
supported the demands made by
protestors during the 25 January
revolution in Egypt, in which you also
participated. What were your
motivations?
I think my involvement was a foregone
conclusion. I took part in the great
majority of demonstrations against the
regime since the 1980s, as president of
the students’ union. Then in the 1990s, we
opposed government decisions,
especially on the Gulf War, but also
domestic policies that perpetuated
oppression and social injustices.
So, when young people used
Facebook to call for demonstrations (in
the first place against the repressive
practices of the police), it was quite
natural for me to be involved, from day
one. 
When we arrived in Tahrir Square to
demonstrate on 25 January 2011 there
were about 20,000 - 25,000 of us. The
number of demonstrators kept increasing
all the time, reaching about 80,000 by the
middle of the night. That was when the
authorities ordered the use of force to
disperse the demonstrators. I saw a
determination in the eyes of the younger
generation that I didn’t find in my
generation. These young people
stood up against the
police with a
tenacity I’ve never seen before in
demonstrations. I thought then it was a
sign  there could be a revolution. And I
was sure of this by Friday 28 January,
when we took to the streets, divided into
three groups. One went to the Moustafa
Mahmoud mosque, in the Mohandessin
quarter, another to the al-Istiqama
mosque, in Giza, and the third to the al-
Nour mosque, in the Abbassiya quarter,
all of them near Tahrir Square, in the city
centre. I was in the Moustafa Mahmoud
mosque group. As I couldn’t see the size
of the procession behind us, I climbed
onto the back of a pick-up truck. The
crowd stretched out before my eyes was
so big I couldn’t see where it ended.
That’s when I said, it’s a revolution.
Do you think the films you made with
the great Egyptian director Youssef
Chahine, like “Chaos” in 2007, helped
raise political awareness among
Egyptian youth?
I can’t claim any of the credit for starting
this revolution. That is both an accusation
– which I don’t deny – and an honour I do
not deserve. But it is true that some
people think our films, some of them
made in the 1980s, played an important
role in shaping the consciousness of the
younger generations who spearheaded
the revolution. 
The youth of a country is not a
“spontaneous generation”. This kind of
realization by young people is the result
of influences coming from all
forms of human
expression, from poetry to politics, music,
theatre and cinema. It would be quite
right then to say every generation has
played a role in this revolution, even
those that are no longer with us. So, for
me, the director Atef al Tayeb [1947-1995]
played a part, as did Youssef Chahine
[1926-2008] and all those who believed in
the will of the people and sided with the
ordinary people.
Do you think the 25 January revolution
will influence your next films, in the
sense that it marks the beginning of a
new era?
There is absolutely no doubt this
revolution will change not only the
nature of films, but also all other art forms
and literature. I think the social
renaissance we are hoping for will be
accompanied by a cultural renaissance.
There will be new ideas as well as new
ways of representing them, reflecting the
dialectic interaction between political
climate and artistic production.
If we go back to the revolution of 23
July 1952 [which led to the declaration of
the Republic of Egypt], it also marked a
turning point in cinema history. It even
influenced love stories. Public and private
worlds intermingled. It makes me think of
the great Syrian poet Nizar
Qabbani [1923-1998] who, in his poetry,
wondered if two lovers could meet on the
banks of the Nile or the Euphrates
without seeing planes overhead on their
way to kill Palestinians, Iraqis or Lebanese.
But having said this, I think we are
going to witness a great renaissance in
the arts and literature, perhaps not
K Scene from the Egyptian
revolution, January
2011.  

immediately, because human expression
takes a while to mature. 
We are heading for some major
changes, and anyone who is not able to
keep pace with the new Egypt currently
being created will find themselves alone
and isolated.
Cinema is, in the first instance, a
vision. But a vision with no image of the
future remains sterile. So cinema has to be
firmly rooted in reality in order to reflect it
faithfully, while also being visionary.
It is too early to draw any firm
conclusions about the 25 January
revolution, but do you feel the outcomes
are satisfactory for the time being? 
I am absolutely satisfied with what this
revolution has achieved, and very
optimistic about the future. Revolution is
a science of change. First of all it has led
to a change in the political system. There
was the symbolic fall of the ruling regime,
which we are in the process of replacing
with a new one based on the principles of
liberty, equality, democracy and social
justice – all key demands of the
revolution. I think these principles, held
aloft by the protestors, will be the basis
for changes in the very model of Egyptian
society. After the revolution of 23 July
1952, the middle classes, that made up
5% of society, increased to 90 %. At the
time, this represented a radical change
for Egyptian society. So I believe the
recent revolution will, soon and in the
same way, transform the established
social order, as well as the nature and very
structure of society. It is not possible to
go against the will of the Egyptians who
carried out this revolution.
I have always thought that the will of
the people carries the will of God within
it, which no one can defeat. Egyptians
took matters into their own hands
through this initiative   and I am talking
about this great revolution that
constitutes one of the great
achievements of civilization. It seems to
me very unlikely that the coming
Because of Youssef Chahine, I started making films
“After the will of God, Youssef Chahine is the reason I became a film-maker. Not
only because he trained me in film-making and gave me the opportunity to
exercise my vocation, but really because, without him, I would never have worked
in this field. I met Youssef Chahine when I was studying to be an engineer. I never
imagined that one day I would make films. Youssef Chahine discovered in me a
talent that I was not even aware of and constantly denied. After three years he
ended up by telling me that there is no harm in trying. It was only then that I
realised he was right. That is why I feel I owe all of my success to him.
The first ten years, when I worked with Youssef Chahine as co-screenwriter
on his films and as assistant director, represented the most important stage of
my career. That is when I learned the trade. My first full-length feature “The
Storm”, which was made in 2000, opened the way to the second stage, which
was the real beginning of my life as a film-maker. Since then and up to 2011, I
have made 11 films, one a year on average. Some of these films are important
steps in themselves, like “Chaos”, Hina Maysara (Until Things Get Better) and
Dokkan Shehata (Shehata’s Shop). These films have attracted the most interest
within Egyptian society and won greater recognition either in terms of the
reviews or in festivals. The critics, in fact, agree that these films have helped to
change Egyptian public opinion on questions of politics, society and art.” 
Khaled Youssef

citizen participation, for democracy and
freedom of speech, as well as an
equitable sharing of national wealth. 
As for a multi-polar world, this has
been demonstrated throughout history.
When one single nation exercises its
power and directs the world, it can only
be a transition phase between two
stages in the progress of mankind. It is
obvious that the USA will retain its role
as a super-power, but it will be alongside
others, like Russia, Japan, China, Europe,
led by Germany or France, and the Arab
world, led by Egypt. In this way, the Arab
world will enter into the alliance of
nations as a sixth force, putting its own
cards on the table alongside other
leaders, when the interests of the major
powers are at stake. ■
L French version of the poster for Youssef Chahine's
film "Chaos".

The youth of a country is not a
“spontaneous generation”. This
kind of realization by young
people is the result of influences
coming from all forms of human
expression, from poetry to politics,
music, theatre and cinema.
changes will be superficial, or that the
new government will be built on a
repressive form of state control like the
previous regime. 
You have said that we are moving
towards a more multi-polar world in
which the Arab world, led by Egypt, will
have a prominent place. Can we expect
a global transformation in the Arab
world that confirms this vision of
things?
[Laughs] It doesn’t surprise me the
whole world is talking about the “Spring”
of Arab revolutions. Everyone has
noticed it, so it is not an illusion. It was
possible to see the current wave of
revolutionary dynamism coming. And
when a regional power like Egypt goes
through a revolution, we can be sure
that it is real. This is not a form of
patriotic chauvinism, but historical and
geographical fact. A change in Egypt has
consequences for the entire Arab world.
Just as, over the past forty years, when
Egypt turned in on itself and refused to
play its true role, the whole Arab world
was weakened and Egypt’s importance
was undermined, too. But when Egypt
takes up its true place as a leader, the
Arab world will experience a second
renaissance, you can be sure about that.
The revolutions in other Arab
countries will not necessarily take the
same form as ours. Each Arab society has
its own ways of working, but each will, of
necessity, evolve and the different
regimes will no doubt make room for
