Mother Teresa, with whom I had a 23-
year long  association, was a
multi-dimensional figure, both simple
and complex. Her attention to
whomsoever was with her at any point in
time — whether poor or rich, disabled,
leprosy afflicted or destitute — was
complete. Yet she also simultaneously
ran a huge religious order, the
Missionaries of Charity, that had taken
root in 123 countries by the time she
died in 1997. This included feeding
centres, schools, soup kitchens, hospices,
homes, leprosy stations for orphans and
abandoned children, drug rehabilitation
centres and home-visiting to comfort the
sick and elderly. All these were achieved
with a fair amount of precision and
regularity by the Sisters and Brothers of
her Order. 
The biography I wrote on Mother
was an accident. I had known her for a
number of years and helped her with her
concerns in Delhi. In all that time it never
struck me to write a book. One day when
we were in conversation she said
NAVIN CHAWLA 



Mother Teresa
the most powerful woman in the world
1. Capital of the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia
L Mother Teresa, with Navin Chawla and his family. © Navin Chawla
something enormously funny and we
both laughed. It was then that I
remarked that none of the books that I
had read about her had brought out that
side of her personality. Perhaps I should
write a book, I said. She was not inclined
to agree: “So many books have already
been written.” I blurted out: “Why,
Mother, does one have to be a Catholic,
can’t a bureaucrat and a Hindu write?” I
immediately regretted my words and fell
into an embarrassed silence for she had
never discriminated in any way. However,
she took that seriously and said: “All right,
but don’t write about me, write about
the work.”
Although she herself remained
fiercely Catholic, her brand of religion
was not exclusive. Convinced that each
person she ministered to was Christ in
suffering, she reached out to people of
all faiths. The very faith that sustained her
infuriated her detractors who saw her as
a symbol of a right-wing conspiracy and,
worse, the principal mouthpiece of the
Vatican’s well-known views against
abortion. Interestingly, such criticism
went largely unnoticed in India, where
she was widely revered.
I once called her the most powerful
woman in the world. She replied:
“Where? If I was, I would bring peace to
the world.” I asked her why she did not
use her undeniable influence to lessen
war. She replied: “War is the fruit of
politics. If I get stuck in politics, I will stop
loving. Because I will have to stand by
one, not by all.”

She devoted her life to
serving the weakest,
founding a multinational
charity in the process.
Portrait by a Hindu author of
Mother Teresa, an Albanian
Catholic who was born in
Skopje1 under the Ottoman
Empire and died in Calcutta,
India. She received the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1979 and in
2003 she was beatified by
Pope John-Paul II. 

The large bequests and donations
were gratefully received and
immediately ploughed into wherever
the need was most pressing. Yet, it was
the “sacrifice money” that she always
remembered — the Kolkata beggar
who emptied his day’s earnings of a few
coins into her hands; the young Hindu
couple who loved each other so much
yet refused a marriage feast so that they
could offer her the money they thus
saved.
When Mother Teresa was alive, I had
expressed concern to her whether the
organization she had built from scratch
could be sustained after she passed on. I
had seen several other organizations
begin to wither away soon after their
charismatic founders died. The first time I
posed this question to her, she merely
pointed her fingers heavenwards. The
second time I asked, she set my question
aside with a smile saying, “Let me go
first.” On my persistence, she finally
answered, “You have been to so many of
our ‘homes’ (branches) in India and
abroad. Everywhere the Sisters wear the
same saris, eat the same kind of food, do
the same work, but Mother Teresa is not
everywhere, yet the work goes on.” Then
she added, “As long as we remain
committed to the poorest of the poor
and don’t end up serving the rich, the
work will prosper.”
As a Hindu, armed only with a certain
eclecticism, I found it took me longer
than most to understand that Mother
Teresa was with Christ in each conscious
hour, whether at Mass or with each of
those whom she tended. It was not a
different Christ on her crucifix and a
different one who lay dying at her
hospice in Kalighat. For Mother Teresa, to
love one’s neighbour was to love God.
This was what was essential to her, not
the size of her mission or the power
others perceived in her. She explained
this to me simply but meaningfully when
she said, “We are called upon not to be
successful, but to be faithful.”  ■
The 100th anniversary of Mother Teresa’s
birth will be celebrated globally between
August 2010 and August 2011.
A retired high-ranking civil servant,
Navin Chawla had a long association
with Mother Teresa. He wrote a
biography of the founder of the
Missionaries of Charity.
LAUTARO POZO
