“Ladj Ly, as seen by JR”. From the series
“Portrait of a generation” and reprinted by
courtesy of JR, specifically to illustrate this
article.  
It is 1997 in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. A young boy is working
in the fields alongside his brothers.
Armed men appear out of nowhere.
His brothers run faster than he does.
He is taken away. He is made to wear
a uniform and smoke cannabis; he is
given a gun and ordered to shoot. He
obeys, as if playing a game of war. His
name is Serge Amisi, and, today, he is
a young man of about 25 – he doesn’t
know the exact year he was born.
Demobilized in 2001, on the death of
DRC president Laurent-Désiré Kabila,
Serge felt lost. It was hard to get back
into civilian life, but, luckily, he
discovered his talents as an artist. He
was able to regain his inner freedom.
He started a new life. Today, Serge
wants to help the 200,000 – 300,000
child soldiers worldwide to do the
same. He dances with his puppets,
makes sculptures and writes – for
himself, for them and for us all.
You were not even 10 years old when
you were taken away and forced to
fight with Laurent-Désiré Kabila’s army.
Up until 2001 you were a child soldier, a
kadogo. How do you look back on this
period?
The image I have of the war is nothing
like the way I saw it at the time. When I
was taken away, I was scared. We were
separated from our families and I soon
understood that they would not let us
see our loved ones again. Although we
were children, we were expected to give
our lives for the nation. I got into the
rhythm of the army and got used to the
people and the life there. 
We didn’t know anything about
politics. We were simply taught warfare
and to obey orders. We became soldiers.
We saw ourselves as belonging to the
same family and had a lot of fun.



Serge Amisi and his
SERGE AMISI was interviewed by
Selen Demir
* Les armes miraculeuses (Miracle weapons) is the
title of a collection of poetry by the Martinican poet
Aimé Césaire (1913 – 2008). ©

You had fun! Weren’t you afraid you
would be killed?
We knew we were going to die, but
sometimes we thought death was for
the dying, not for us. We smoked joints
and saw ourselves as actors in a
Schwarzenegger film, as if death weren't
real. We were the stars of the army,
because the adults found the child-
soldiers very entertaining.
But we missed being able to play.
They paid my wages, but I had nothing
to spend it on, except maybe some toy
soldiers. |And when the war started
again I put my uniform back on and got
ready to play at fighting for real. 
I learned to live without fear or
humility. I couldn’t live like that today.
When I see myself in the army, it’s as if I
am looking from the outside. I don’t
recognize that child, because I am so
different now.
Did you have dreams, or did you stop
yourself from even thinking about
them?
We didn’t have time to think. We didn’t
think about the future. We didn’t even
think we might grow up one day. We
were there to fight in the war, and that’s
all there was to it. 
What do you think about the soldiers
who forced you to fight and who
continue to do the same thing to other
children today?
At the time we thought we were helping
the nation and were fans of President
Kabila. He was like a father for us and we
liked him a lot. We didn’t particularly
blame the soldiers, as they had given us
a power over adults that children do not
usually have. We were always competing
to see who was the strongest. The
civilian world was unknown to us. We
had power, why let it go?
I still don’t know enough about
politics to understand why the war
started and why these soldiers took us
away. But I do know that if you love your
country, you have to protect the
children. Who will free the country from
war if the children spend all their time in
the army? I am not angry, but I do not
agree with the soldiers either. I feel sorry
for them, more than anything. They
don’t know what they are doing. 

miracle weapons
Today you can see that you were being
manipulated. Do you feel you’ve freed
yourself from this military
programming?
I found it hard to get back into civilian life.
I was demobilized in 2001 and became a
civilian again. But I still thought like a
soldier. It is thanks to the Espace Masolo [a
resource centre for artists and
craftspeople, set up in Kinshasa in 2003,
the capital of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, by the Congolese artists Malvine
Velo, Hubert Mahela and Lamber
Mousseka] that I learned how to get
along better with other people. That’s
where I discovered art and found my
freedom and independence again.
During the war you were a musical
entertainer much appreciated by your
comrades. Did singing help you put up
with the situation?
Yes, I loved to sing and make people
laugh. Before the army, my elder
brothers used to sing me songs and tell
“People say we are war children, child-soldiers, kadogos, but we were
children in the war. I didn’t want to be in the war, I was made to carry
a gun, and I no longer had my parents or my family, I only had the
army and my gun, my gun that I was told was my mother and father.”
Serge Amisi, Souvenez-vous de moi, l'enfant de demain, Vents d’ailleurs, 2011
K Scene from a performance of “Congo my body” at
the Parc de la Villette in Paris (France), in 2010 

stories. In the army, some of the soldiers
had children that they missed. They used
to call on me to lift their spirits. My little
voice and child’s size made them laugh. I
was a kind of mini-star all on my own,
which made some of the other child
soldiers jealous. I loved to act and could
imagine myself as an artist.
What art forms do you use today?
I am a dancer, puppeteer and sculptor. I
have an idea for a solo project where I
combine all three art forms. Meanwhile, I
put on a play [Congo My Body] with my
friend Yaoundé Mulamba, who I knew
before the army and who was a child
soldier with me. In the past few years we
have played in different places in Europe
and DRC. I still can’t earn a living from
art, but I hope to find a studio where I
can work. I also have other projects,
simply as an artist, not as an ex-child-
soldier, and I am in contact with youth
groups in Mozambique and Germany.
How did you feel about performing in
front of other people when you first
started as an artist? Were you afraid?
I was afraid I would shock people and not
be able to deal with that. I was even afraid
I’d be threatened or judged. When I came
to France at the end of 2008, I suddenly
felt shocked by my own past and I started
to think about it a lot. I had the impression
I was reliving everything in my head. Now
I feel more at peace and avoid thinking
too much about it so that I can move on. If
I could have, I wouldn’t have gone to fight
in the war. I try not to feel guilty, by telling
myself that it was not my fault, that the
adults forced me to go and drugged me. I
have managed to distance myself from all
of that with the help of a few people who
have given me a lot of support. One day I
was given some notebooks and I started
to write my life story, just for myself. 
Last March, your book, Souvenez-vous
de moi, l’enfant de demain [Remember
me, tomorrow’s child], came out in
France, published by Vents d’ailleurs.
What message do you want to pass on to
today’s young people?
I published this book [using the notes he
wrote in Lingala in the notebooks
between 2004 and 2008] to leave a
record of what happened and to show
young people what I went through as a
child and what others went through or
are still going through in other parts of
the world. This could be useful to them. ■
Serge Amisi was interviewed in April 2011 in the Courier office by Selen Demir, 18, 
a French-Turkish student at the University of Paris IV (France). This is her first magazine
interview.

