I love laser 
– it’s my 
guiding light

What is the common thread that could possibly link denim jeans, cancer and pesticides?
None is evident. Yet when South African chemist Tebello Nyokong describes her
fascinating research, the link that emerges is light. Nyokong, a specialist in nanochemistry,
loves laser, and is using it in ways that could have a revolutionary 
impact on medicine and the environment. 

Professor Nyokong, you are currently involved
in research on a new cancer diagnosis and
treatment methodology, intended as an
alternative to chemotherapy. Can you give us a
simple explanation of your work?
As chemists, we are designers. My research deals
with the development of drugs from compounds
called phtalocyanines. We call them dyes
because their molecules are similar to those of
dyes you use in colouring blue jeans. They are
used in a treatment of cancer called
photodynamic therapy, or PDT. It’s a
multidisciplinary approach – chemists, biologists,
biotechnologists are working together. As a
chemist I am in the centre of it because I make
the molecules. I have a big team, about 30
people. And then I have other people all over the
world who are doing the preclinical testing. 
Molecules that dye blue jeans can also treat
cancer?
Look at a plant - leaves are green because of
chlorophyll. Blood is red because of
haemoglobin. Those molecules are actually
almost the same, except the one in leaves has
magnesium in the centre, the one in blood has
iron in the centre. A small change like that can
make the difference between non-medicine and
medicine. The molecule in the jeans is the same
as mine, with a slight change, a different metal,
to make it do what you want it to do.
PDT is a new treatment?
No, what is new is the drugs we are making. PDT
is already available for some cancers, in America,
Europe and Russia. It works with light. The drug is
introduced into the body and activated with
light. The problem is that right now the side
effects are very strong. The drug must be
introduced into the body and it must go to the
cancer tissue. If it goes to healthy tissue, which is
the case with the drugs now available, the
patient has to stay indoors out of the sun or the
healthy tissue also begins to get killed, like
chemotherapy.
Your molecules are safer?
This is the whole aim. We are making molecules
that are cancer specific – targeted to cancer. 
Also, with my own drugs, you need very little in
order to absorb light. And I have gone much
further because I am now combining my drugs
with drug delivery, which has never been done
before. This is the nanotechnology aspect. The
molecules have nanomaterials called quantum
dots attached to them that can penetrate very
easily any part of the body. They are good at
drug delivery and secondly they also give off
light, so we can see more easily where the cancer
is. So it is just beautiful what we do.
Can this treatment be used for all kinds of
cancer?
This treatment cannot replace surgery. The light
(to activate the drug) is transported with tubes –
we are using laser and fibre optics. If the cancer is
spread throughout the body, this cannot work.
It’s localized treatment. You have to direct the
laser exactly where the cancer is.
How did you come to choose this domain for
your research?
It was accidental – that’s the beauty of chemistry.
Once you have the interest, you are always
thinking: ‘what more can I do with molecules?’
The bottom line for me is that I started working
with laser, because I just really love light. I love
laser. It’s bright, direct and it has different
colours. I started finding different applications
for it. That was wonderful for me. My interest was
laser, not cancer.
Is nanochemistry dangerous?
I am afraid it is. Because something that can
penetrate and enter any part of the body is
dangerous. Secondly, the molecules that we
have made so far, the nanoparticles, in the centre
of them there are heavy metals. If they leak out,
they can attach themselves to your
haemoglobin, to other parts of the body and can
be dangerous to you. With the help of biologists,
we are testing to see how toxic they are and
trying to develop those that are least toxic. We
do research both on applications and their
toxicity. 
How long do you think it will take before your
drugs are in general use?
There are many variables when it comes to using
these drugs on people. One thing which is
problematic for oncologists is that lasers are
expensive and difficult to maintain. I can do
nothing on my own. I am a chemist  - we can
develop things – but collaboration is what’s
important to see if they work. The Centre for
Scientific and Industrial Research is doing pre-
clinical testing for me in South Africa. Beyond
that, a group in Switzerland has developed a very
interesting way to test – using egg embryos. You
inject the dye into the veins around the embryo
and test its activity.

PROFESSOR
NYOKONG answers
questions put by
Cathy Nolan,
UNESCO
© Micheline Pelletier
for L’Oréal Corporate
Foundation

Your research also has environmental
applications.
These molecules are really magic. They can do so
many different things. The process can be used
to purify water that has been polluted,
particularly by pesticides. In our countries,
people still have to have water from open
sources – run-off from the fields ends up in
household water, and we have to deal with that.
Throughout time, light has been used to purify
water. You expect bacteria and so on to be killed
by light. But if you put these molecules in the
water, that process is made faster. And also the
products that are formed are less toxic. If you do
it just biologically – just the sun - they can form
molecules that are more harmful to the body. We
have managed, by using this drug and light, to
make molecules that are no longer toxic at all to
human beings. This is much closer to success –
we have just patented how to do it.
Your goal is to develop a product?
That is my mission. It will come more quickly
from the pollution side. Dealing with people has
so many rules, it will take much longer. But I
would like to do it so that young people can see
that, in South Africa, they can take science and
develop a product. They cannot imagine this,
they believe things come from somewhere else.
Did you imagine when you were younger that
chemistry would be your life’s work?
Not in a million years, no. We had no role models.
But I was always ambitious – I always thought I
could be a doctor or a dentist. And teachers are
very important. I met a lecturer when I was in my
first year at the University (of Lesotho) He was in
the Peace Corps from America. He just made
chemistry so much fun. He made me feel that
chemistry is the place to be, and then I was
I can do nothing
on my own. I am a
chemist  - we can
develop things –
but collaboration
is what’s
important to see if
they work.

J Lasers have a host of scientific applications. Shown here is
“Reflections and drops of water”, an illustration of the “Giant Laser
Fountain” experiment at the Laser Physics Laboratory  (CNRS/Paris
13). It reveals the functioning of optical fibres while demonstrating
the fundamental principles of optics. 
See  www.fontainelaser.fr
© K. Penalba/INP-CNRS
hooked. I also had opportunities. The university –
I originally come from Lesotho – gave me the
opportunity to be trained as an academic. I won
a scholarship to train in Canada. I took that
opportunity and managed to complete my
masters and doctorate. And I am doing the same
for others now. I have lecturers from all over
Africa – from all over the world, in fact - training
with me for their universities.
As the first woman in your department at
Rhodes University, you have said you get
challenged by doing the “impossible”.
This is the reality – it was very difficult for me to
progress with very little support. Many women
give up because of this. You’ve got to be a little
mad to do what I have done. But what I vowed is
that I will help other women as much as I can.
Their confidence levels are not as high. I don’t
know why, but men are confident even when
what they are saying does not make much sense!
As a trailblazer, would you say this is a good
time to be a woman scientist in South Africa?
Yes, it’s a good time. I have a lot of girl students. I
attract them like bees, even though I’m a little bit
tough!
To be honest, I think people don’t take the
opportunities that are provided for us. We are in
a very lucky country. South Africa is both a first
and a third world country. There are very poor
people, eating from bins out there, and very rich.
The infrastructure is there and the government
has made a conscious decision that they are not
just going to combat poverty, they will also
develop science and technology. People must
really take advantage of this and work hard…but
apparently hard work is not very popular.
Funding is available for us to get equipment, to
get more students – I’m applying, I’m grabbing. 
Tebello Nyokong, 59, is a Professor of
Medicinal Chemistry and Nanotechnology at
Rhodes University (South Africa) and Director
of the Nanotechnology Innovation Centre for
Sensors (Mintek). She was one of the five
Laureates of the 2009 L’Oréal-UNESCO Awards
for Women in Science.

