Postscript
Any discussion of cultures in intimate
contact with one another—whether this
contact manifests itself as tension, as overt
conflict, or as a search for rapprochement—
ought to begin with some effort to define
culture.  In this presentation, I follow a
perspective developed by the American
anthropologist Clifford Geertz nearly forty
years ago.  Culture, he argued, does not lie
in patterns of behaviour and social
structures in themselves, but rather in the
ways we create and express meaning within
these patterns and structures.  A culture is
thus the body of ideas, beliefs, gestures,
rituals, and practices by which a society
comes to see itself as a coherent,
meaningful whole—in effect, as a people
apart, with a distinctive identity of its own.
Cultures are not hard-shelled; only
rarely can they shield themselves from the
pressure and influence of others.  Rather,
cultures are permeable, capable of
engaging in processes of interpenetration
and hybridization.  Cultures can exist side-



Art as a bridge
between cultures
Stephen Humphreys 
Since cultures have existed, they have mixed, interacted
and given birth to new, hybrid cultures. Yet, at the same
time, they have a tendency to split themselves off, and to
reject neighbouring cultures. Taking as examples North
American and Arab/Muslim cultures, Stephen Humphreys
highlights the role of literature and the arts as special
means for rapprochement.
by-side or be interwoven with one another
in a state of equilibrium.  Each interacts with
neighbouring cultures in a limited,
pragmatic way but has no trouble retaining
its sense of itself and maintaining its core
identity.
Conflict arises when two cultural
systems come to seem threatening to each
other.  This sense of threat often arises out
of the violent intrusion of one cultural
system into the space occupied by
another—“imperialism” on a small or large
scale, which is a constant and pervasive
feature of human history.  However, fear of
the other is most powerful and insidious
when it emerges out of a situation of rapid,
pervasive, uncontrollable hybridization.
Such hybridization creates an acute sense
of loss of control.  All the old rules of
behavior, symbols, beliefs, and rituals
dissolve and begin to seem foreign.  One
feels that he is becoming a stranger in his
own home.  This anxiety of hybridization is
what we confront everywhere in the world
today.  Almost every culture is infected by
it.  The question we face is whether it is
possible to heal or ameliorate this anxiety.
If so, how, and to what extent.
K Meeting at the heart of painting: diptych by Helga
Shuhr (Germany) and Youssef Fatis (Libya). 
© Helga Shuhr & Youssef Fatis 
Photo : UNESCO/R. Fayad 

Beyond stereotypes
In trying to answer this question, I will
focus on the U.S. response to Arab and
Muslim societies.  No one will be
surprised to hear that this response is
confused. In general Americans do want
to understand and even accept cultural
difference, but have a deeply rooted
belief in the superiority of “the American
way”. The American response focuses on
fears—specifically, of “Islamic
terrorism”—rather than on a
comprehensive and nuanced
engagement with the diverse and
complex cultures of Arab and Muslim
societies. A comprehensive engagement
of the kind required can be found in the
United States, but only in boutique
environments—in colleges and
universities, rather than the grand public
square defined by the mass media and
the internet. 
Inevitably, stereotypes about Arabs
and Muslims reign supreme.  The
problem is how to get a broad spectrum
of Americans to question stereotypes, to
confront their fears, and to engage with
Arab and Muslim cultures in a serious
way.
At this point we need to be honest
with ourselves.  Even if we succeed in
this task, there will surely remain cultural
differences that are too stark to be
absorbed, that challenge and offend
deeply held American values and ways
of life.  A single example will suffice.  To
the American eye, the burqu` and niqab
symbolize—indeed they epitomize—
the degradation and depersonalization
of women.  Almost no amount of
discussion and explanation will get rid
of this almost instinctive response.
Another caution.  One can come to
understand cultural differences and still
reject them as valid or acceptable
alternatives.  Does such a rejection
inevitably lead to conflict?  I have no
immediate answer to this question, but
it must be confronted thoughtfully and
honestly.
The mirror of suspicion
Cultural engagement requires
selectivity.  One cannot know everything
about everything.  But then what
aspects of Arab and Muslim cultures
should we focus on?  What groups will
we choose to represent these cultures to
us?  To this point Americans have tended
to fix their attention on two groups, to
the near exclusion of all others: militant
religious radicals and women.  The fear
and anxiety they engender are bound to
distort discussion and analysis.  
In regard to the first group, let us say
simply that among Americans, Islam is
viewed through the prism of September
11 and Arabs through the prism of the
the Israel/Palestine conflict.  The
converse is also true, I think: for Arabs
both in the Middle East and the
diaspora, the United States is also
viewed through the prism of
Israel/Palestine.  We are the mirror image
of each other’s suspicion, fear, and
resentment.  It is a perfect recipe for
mutual tension, distrust, and even
cultural repugnance.  
As regards women’s rights activists,
some are informed and culturally
sensitive, some are not.  In either case,
however, interventions in this arena
strike at the most intimate and bitterly
contested dimensions of Arab and
Muslim societies.  In this case, concern
and engagement may sometimes
increase rather than diffuse cultural
tension.
Culture as a go-between
Literature and the visual and performing
arts are a compelling means to get to
understand Arab and Muslim cultures.
An article in the New Yorker by Claudia
Roth Pierpont makes a telling statement:
“Arabic novels offer a marvelous array of
answers to questions we did not know
we wanted to ask.”   Precisely. The only
problem is that so little of the Arabic
literature published over the last twenty
years is available in English.
While novelists construct their own
worlds, which are not a simple mirror of
their cultures and do not speak for their
societies, but only for themselves, their
work is a direct, authentic product of the
societies and cultures within which they
live.  Much the same could be said of
musicians, painters, and sculptors.
In spite of all limitations and
reservations, literature and the arts are
the best way for outsiders to get inside
another culture. They give us the
broadest and most varied perspectives
on the self-understandings of Arab
cultures and on the myriad ways they
try to define themselves.  On the other
hand, in order to serve as a bridge
between cultures, these arts require
translators, performers, and
interpreters. Such cultural brokers are
often regarded with some
condescension, as simple conduits by
which the original creative efforts of
others can be transmitted to new
audiences.  Plainly that view does not
do justice to the depth of knowledge
and understanding required to make
the products of one cultural system
intelligible, meaningful, and even
usable to the members of another, very
different culture.  A translator’s work,
like a performing musician’s, is perhaps
not creative, but it is re-creative.  It is an
essential element in the process of
cultural rapprochement. 
In closing, I will argue that
Americans will only be able to come to
terms with the complex realities of Arab
cultures when the United States
develops a much larger body of
translators and interpreters than it now
has, and—even more critically—when
these brokers become integral
members, rather than  marginal players
in the country’s intellectual and cultural
life.  This will not happen anytime soon,
and in any case it will not resolve all the
tensions and hostilities between such
very disparate cultures.  But it would at
least allow Americans to move toward
seeing Arabs and Muslims as they really
are, in all their complexity.  In return, of
course, one hopes that Arab
intellectuals and scholars will make a
similar effort to make sense of American
life and thought—no easy task, I admit,
but one that must be undertaken if we
are ever to move beyond the mutual
confusion and suspicion in which both
cultures are so deeply entangled. 
R. Stephen Humphreys is Professor of
History and Islamic Studies at the
University of California, Santa Barbara
(USA). This article is taken from his
paper, Reflections on the Problem of
“Rapprochement des Cultures” presented
at UNESCO on 9 February 2010, as part
of the Forum held on the occasion of
the award of the seventh
UNESCO/Emirate of Sharjah Prize in
Arab Culture.
Postscript
A translator’s work, like a
performing musician’s, is
perhaps not creative, but it is 
re-creative.  It is an essential
element in the process of cultural
rapprochement.
