Synthetic trees
A meeting with Klaus Lackner
Katerina Markelova 
Topping the list of solutions to capture
CO2 and reduce the concentration of
greenhouse gases are synthetic trees,
invented by geophysicist, Klaus Lackner,
of Columbia University (USA). Although
still at the testing stage, this ‘CO2
scrubber’ should filter air rather like a
natural tree does, but with a much
higher capacity. “A CO2 scrubber of the
same size as a windmill can remove far
more CO2 than the windmill can avoid,”
explains Lackner.
He got the idea in 1998, “having
realised how much CO2 is in the air. My
daughter, Clare, did a science project and
demonstrated that she can take CO2 out
of the air.” In one night, he says, she was
able to capture half of the CO2 in the air.
Extending this experiment, Klaus
Lackner built a “vacuum cleaner” which,
when placed in a windy area, absorbs air
carrying CO2 and filters it, before
releasing the purified air again. Caustic
soda is the key to the method’s success.
When it is in contact with carbon
dioxide it makes a sodium bicarbonate
solution. This liquid is then compressed
until it forms a highly concentrated gas
that can be stored in porous rocks on
the sea floor. Because it is denser than
seawater, it cannot escape and can be
sequestered for millions of years.
For Professor Lackner, “the first step
is to remove some CO2 from the air. If it
proves cost-effective, it could balance
out emissions from cars and aeroplanes.
If air capture, together with other CO2
reduction technologies, manages to
stop the rise in CO2 in the atmosphere,
we could then start to use additional air
capture.” 
Synthetic trees provide another
piece of the jigsaw for international
negotiations on carbon dioxide
emissions, because the technology
makes it possible to collect CO2 on
behalf of another country. “Air capture
can separate the [CO2] sources from the
sinks” says Klaus Lackner. “This makes it
possible to import and export carbon
reductions.  It also makes it possible to
strive for a world in which all CO2
emissions can be addressed.
Automobiles and airplanes need not be
off-limits in this discussion.” 
At present, this process is still
expensive, “just like a hand-made car”,
says Lackner, who is nevertheless
optimistic that costs will come down.
But artificial trees are not a miracle cure.
As he explains, “the major energy cost is
in the compression, which, if it uses
electricity, would result in the release of
an equivalent of some 20% of the
captured CO2 at the site of a distant
power plant.” 
It is, though, a long and involved
process. “It needs time and
commitment,” says Lackner, anticipating
the increased use of renewable energy.
“We may be able to reduce the CO2 in
the atmosphere, but this does not give
us an excuse to continue to emit.” 
J J Evidence of purposeful iron supply driving a
phytoplankton bloom in offshore waters in summer
2002.  The ‘Ocean Color’ satellite image provides a
map of the stocks of phytoplankton in the ocean, with
blue denoting low stocks and progressively warmer
colours – from green to red – indicating higher stocks.  
© Courtesy of Jim Gower (IOS,
Canada)/NASA/Orbimage
I The capacity of plants to capture CO2 served as a
model for Kalus Lackner’s synthetic trees.
© UNESCO/Linda Shen
