What explains the phenomenal growth of
India’s pharmaceutical industry, which has
become synonymous with the production of
high-quality, low-cost generic drugs in the last
few decades?   
One of India’s foremost science-based industries,
India’s pharmaceutical industry has wide-ranging
capabilities in the complex fields of drug
manufacturing and technology.  Industrial
turnover has grown from a modest US$ 300
million in 1980 to about US$ 19 billion in 2008.
India now ranks third worldwide after the USA
and Japan in terms of the volume of production,
with a 10% share of the world market. In terms of
the value of production, it ranks 14th for a 1.5%
global share.
Several factors have contributed to the industry’s
dynamic growth. In 1970, the government
introduced the Indian Patents Act to reduce the
hold of foreign multinationals (which had
dominated the Indian market since the country’s
Independence in 1947).  Favourable to
intellectual property rights, this policy allowed
Indian pharmaceutical companies to come up
with cost-effective processes for imitating
known products, by not recognizing
international product patents for
pharmaceutical products. 
In three decades, India’s pharmaceutical industry has
become the third most important in the world. Almost
self-sufficient in medicines, it holds first place for the
number of factories approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA). Specializing in the
manufacture of generics at
unbeatable prices, its
industry boasts some
5000 factories,
employing 340,000
workers. What is the
key to this incredible
success? And what is 
the downside? 
Interview with SUNIL MANI, by Shiraz Sidhva, 
correspondent for the UNESCO Courier



India’s 
pharmaceutical boom
© DR

This afforded the industry a long learning period,
which allowed Indian drug producers to become
experts in ‘reverse engineering’ (or the copying of
patented foreign pharmaceuticals drugs), or
developing technologies locally and in an
extremely cost-effective manner. 
Another factor that has fuelled the industry’s
growth is the copious supply of science
graduates. India’s higher education system is
biased in favour of natural sciences compared to
engineering and technology. During the 1970s
and 1980s, and even up to the 90s, the ratio of
science graduates to engineers was about 8:1
(eight science graduates for every engineer
produced). This gave India a comparative
advantage in science-based industries like the
pharmaceuticals industry. 
The Indian state also gave research grants and
tax incentives for setting up R&D facilities. 
How has the industry changed after 2005, when
India ended its protectionist policy and
amended its patent laws to comply with its
World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Related
Intellectual Property Agreement (TRIPS)
obligations? Does the emphasis remain on
exports, even though the Indian domestic
market has doubled in the last decade? 
Much of industrial growth is fuelled by exports,
with exports growing by an average rate of 22%
between 2003 and 2008. India currently exports
drug intermediates, bulk drugs, APIs [Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredients], finished dosage
formulations, biopharmaceuticals and clinical
services. The top five destinations in 2008 were,
in descending order, the USA, Germany, Russia,
the United Kingdom and China.
The industry is made up of about 5,000 licensed
Indian and foreign manufacturers, which directly
employ about 340,000 individuals. It is
dominated by pharmaceutical formulations – the
process of combining different chemical
substances to manufacture a drug – and over
400 active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) for
use in drug manufacture. 
India is self-sufficient in most drugs, as witnessed
by a growing positive trade balance. The
pharmaceuticals industry is one of India’s most
innovative, in terms of R&D and the number of
patents granted, both in India and abroad. It is
very active in the global market for generics,
supplying even developed countries.  
India accounted for one out of every four
abbreviated new drug applications (generic
product approvals) from the US government's
Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) in 2007
and 2008. The Indian pharmaceutical industry
A long learning
period for the
nation’s industry
has allowed
Indian drug
producers to
become experts in
‘reverse
engineering’. 
Sunil Mani is Planning
Commission Chair in
Development
Economics at the
Centre for
Development Studies
in Trivandrum (India).
He is a contributing
author to the UNESCO
Science Report 2010.
© UNESCO/M. Ravassard
J Manufacturing drugs
wearing protective clothing
in India, one of the world
leaders in the pharmaceutical
industry.
©Sinopictures/dinodia/Speci
alist Stock

also accounts for approximately 25% of drug
master files with USFDA and has the highest
number of plants approved by that agency, of
any foreign country. 
Some Indian manufacturers who were at the
forefront of producing generic drugs are now
keen to formulate new drugs instead of copies.
Is India poised to launch its first domestically
developed drug? 
To bring a new drug to the market is an
extremely costly affair, sometimes involving
billions of dollars.  India also has regulations,
which may not be as stringent as those of the
USFDA, but they are not easy, because,
ultimately, the drugs are being used on people.
Clinical trials are extremely costly, and the failure
rates are extremely high. And the period
involved in these processes could easily take
nine to ten years. Drug discovery on a small scale
is already going on, but if it wants to become an
originator of the global drug manufacturing
industry, it will take quite a bit of time. It is
unlikely this will happen on a very large scale. It
calls for massive amounts of investment in R&D,
which most Indian companies are not in a
position to do. 
Could you elaborate on the recent emergence
of India as a hub for pharmaceutical research
and development, and a favoured destination
for foreign pharmaceutical companies to hold
clinical trials?   
One spin-off of India’s innovative capability in
pharmaceuticals is that it has become a popular
destination for clinical trials, contract
manufacturing and R&D outsourcing. These
capabilities hold great promise for the Indian
pharmaceutical industry, as an estimated   
US$ 103 billion of patented US drugs are at risk
of losing patents by 2012. Furthermore, the
global market for contract manufacturing of
prescription drugs is expected to grow from 
US$ 26 billion to US$ 44 billion by 2015 or so. 
The costs of conducting clinical trials in India are
much lower compared to Western countries.
Another important factor is that there is a large
supply of treatment-naïve patients, who have
never used drugs before – the study of the drug
being tested is much more effective on these
first-time drug users. The third factor is that there
are highly-skilled English-speaking doctors
available to conduct these trials (most higher
education is conducted in English in India). Also,
the time taken to conduct clinical trials in India is
much shorter, because it is easier to get patients
to agree to these trials.      
India continues to be a leading supplier of less
expensive antibiotics, cancer therapy, and AIDS
drugs to the developing world. What has been
the impact of generic drugs produced by Indian
companies on health care in India? And for the
rest of the world?
This is difficult to measure because the Indian
pharmaceutical industry has been more
interested in exporting to other developing
countries and also to the West. Indian
pharmaceutical companies have been
instrumental in dramatically lowering the prices
of anti-retroviral drugs, and this has made AIDS
treatments much more affordable. This is one of
the most important recent contributions of
India’s pharmaceutical industry to India and the
rest of the world. 
Unfortunately, however, the emphasis on exports
by Indian companies has prevented them from
manufacturing drugs for the so-called neglected
diseases, like malaria and tuberculosis, which
Western companies are simply not interested in,
because the markets are very small, and patients
suffering from these diseases are usually poor
and cannot afford to pay anything. There isn’t
much money in these drugs. Indian companies
also share the same ideology, so none of them
have any credible R&D projects to manufacture
drugs to combat these diseases. 

The costs of
conducting
clinical trials in
India are much
lower compared to
Western countries.
Another
important factor is
that there is a
large supply of
treatment-naïve
patients, who
have never used
drugs before – the
study of the drug
being tested is
much more
effective on these
first-time drug
users.
