It isn’t a place exactly. Technically it
would be defined as an event. More
accurately it could be described as a
community. Perhaps though it would be
best characterized as a spirit that for
almost three weeks at the close of
winter each year inhabits a growing
number of educators, students, poets,
and spectators throughout the
Chicagoland area. It’s Louder Than a
Bomb, the Chicago Youth Poetry
Festival.
Louder Than a Bomb (LTaB) started
in 2001 as a poetry slam of 8 high
schools in what co-founder Kevin Coval
can only describe as a “rat-infested
basement.” By the time I began
competing in Louder Than a Bomb as a
13 year old the competition had grown
to 15 teams (mine being the only team
representing a middle school).  It was in
The marquee event of LTaB is still
the poetry slam. A poetry slam is an
Olympic-style poetry contest where
writers present original work without
the aid of music or props. The slam is,
by nature, ridiculously subjective in its
judging and there is a saying at LTaB
that the best poets never win. While to
many outside of the community this
sounds like an egregious injustice, the
secret of the slam is that it is a gimmick.
Slam uses the ruse of competition to
elevate the visibility of the art and voice
of young people. 
Poetry against segregation
This work would be important in any
place but in the city of Chicago it is an
essential labor. Chicago is a remarkably
segregated city. In the city Dr. Martin
Luther King once called “the northern
most racist city” there is still a culture that
rarely puts people of different racial or
socioeconomic backgrounds in the same
Creating community in a city notorious in the past for segregation, elevating the visibility
of young people’s art and voice, filling the silence of misunderstanding…. These are a few
of the achievements of the poetry slam with the resounding name of Louder Than a Bomb,
where Chicago’s budding poets get together. 
NATE MARSHALL
When
poetry
2003 and I vividly remember walking
into the opening event of the weekend,
an event known as “Crossing the Street”
and seeing a life-altering scene. Inside
the dark room I saw teenagers of all
colors gathered around in celebration of
themselves. The air was filled with the
smell of free pizza and the thump of hip-
hop music and I was mesmerized by the
energy in the room.
The part of the scene that most
drew me was a large and growing circle
of students in the background. As I
bordered on the outskirts of the group I
heard the voices of young people
rhyming. More than simply reciting
memorized lyrics they were
spontaneously composing raps, songs,
and chants. As I watched this freestyle
cipher for a few minutes, I was struck by
the radical democracy of the circle.
Everybody who wanted an opportunity
to rhyme got one. Skill was the only
measure by which everyone was judged. 
Poet, rapper and essayist Nate
Marshall, 21, reciting his work
at the poetry slam “Louder
Than a Bomb” in Chicago
(USA). 
© Siskel/Jacobs Productions
is louder than a bomb

room. LTaB’s demographic is so bizarre
because it defies the tendency towards
the monolith that is ever present in
Chicago. LTaB does important work every
year bringing students from all different
types of backgrounds to gather, listen,
and learn from themselves and each
other. 
Chicago’s literary legacy is an
enviable one and that is evident in the
work of the students. To hear a student
like Kush Thompson from the troubled
Orr High School on the West Side of
Chicago speak passionately about the
unfair body images that a “Mattel
branded” (makers of the Barbie doll,
notably) society propagates is an
amazing thing. It’s even more amazing to
see her share the stage with students
from marquee magnet schools and
wealthy suburban schools that can
identify with her story. This discovery of
commonality among students is creating
a new culture in the city. 
Even as Chicago in the past few years
has experienced a rash of youth violence
LTaB has remained an amazing example
of safe space. In 10 years of operation
LTaB has never experienced a violent
incident, even as they draw students from
across the invisible yet very real lines that
separate different neighborhoods and
gang territories. Despite the increasingly
steep competition, which now includes
over 70 teams and 30 individual poets,
the spirit of community remains intact at
LTaB. The cipher is still one of the most
common occurrences at LTaB and it is not
uncommon after a bout to see the
competing teams trading notes and
laughs at a local fried chicken restaurant.
Bomb debris
In 2007 US filmmakers Greg Jacobs and
Jon Siskel noticed this spirit. During the
next year they followed three individuals
and one team on their journey in
preparation for LTaB. I was lucky to be
among those they decided to follow.
From the hundreds of hours of footage
they built a documentary film to offer a
glimpse into the lives of a few students
and the way in which the slam has been a
life-shifting experience for the young
people involved. 
The documentary has garnered
positive reviews from famed film critic
Roger Ebert, Variety Magazine, and the LA
Times among others. Film festivals across
the U.S. and Canada have selected
“Louder Than a Bomb” and it has won
awards at many, including Palm Springs,
Chicago, and Austin. The film will be aired
in the fall of 2011 nationally on the Oprah
Winfrey Network as a part of her
documentary of the month club. The LTaB
film has even inspired an offshoot event
in Tulsa, Oklahoma. In April of 2011 I was
able to travel to Tulsa with Kevin Coval to
help organize the first annual LTaB Tulsa. 
Erika Dickerson, 2009 LTaB All-Star,
loves the platform of the festival as an
opportunity to “build community and
network with one another as well as
professional artists.” Cydney Edwards, a
two-time LTaB All-Star, said “Louder Than
a Bomb was a venue for me to align

“If you’re not here during the
first week of May, then you’re
not in best place. Louder Than a
Bomb is the coolest place on
the planet. “
Adam Gottlieb, contestant from 
2005 to 2008
Nate Marshall, 21, is a poet, rapper
and essayist. Main character in the
award-winning feature-length
documentary “Louder Than a Bomb”, he
was a finalist of the Chicago Literary
Guild’s Gwendolyn  Brooks Open Mic
Award 2010. His work has been
published in several poetry
anthologies. He is finishing his BA in
English and Afro-American studies at
Vanderbilt University in Nashville (USA).
myself with peers of mine from all over
Chicago and mold my craft.”  These
students, some of the champions of the
slam, represent the small section of the
participants who will pursue their literary
art as a career. For so many other
students, there is less focus on craft, but
that is perfectly fine. Louder Than a Bomb
produces great art, and elevates that art
in ways that it would not be otherwise,
but the most pressing work that LTaB
does is elevate young people. By
empowering them to use their words and
listen to each other, LTaB empowers
students to analyze and challenge the
world that they live in and its injustices
and shortcomings. As 2011 LTaB Indy
Slam Champion Malcolm London said
about the work of the festival, “this
doesn’t stop at LTaB.” These students
create community where segregation
existed for their parents. They fill the
dangerous silence of misunderstanding
with a symphony of stories. 
The power of LTaB is that sense of the
story, that sense of imagination, and
student using it to tell a willing audience
about the world they live while
empowering them to build the world
they dream. ■
L Scene from the film “Louder Than a Bomb”.

L Poster from the latest Louder Than a Bomb event.
