The global nature of communications
and what we have chosen to call the
‘information society’ are inviting
anthropologists to rethink, at least
partially, the basic matter and categories
of their discipline – forms of exchange
and the ways in which social links are
woven. 
For the French anthropologist
Claude Lévi-Strauss [1908-2009],
anthropology is not only a humanist
discipline, but also the product of forms
of humanism that have left a mark on
history and the development of Western
societies. As early as 1956, in a
document written for UNESCO,1 he
identified three forms of humanism in
conclusion to his analyses of the
relationships between the sciences and
social sciences: Renaissance humanism,
with its roots in the rediscovery of
classical antiquity texts; exotic
humanism, associated with the
knowledge of Eastern and Far Eastern
cultures; and democratic humanism,
associated with an anthropology that
embraces all the activities of human
societies. 
These three forms of humanism, it
should be pointed out, are linked to
discoveries of texts, oral traditions or
other expressions of culture, which
opened up new fields of investigation
and allowed the development of new
critical methods and, as a result, new
knowledge. In the case of Renaissance
humanism, it was the knowledge of

The notion of humanism is
evolving, apace with
scientific discoveries and
political developments. In
this digital age, technologies
are increasing the
opportunities of the
hybridization of cultures,
but also encouraging the
advent of democracy and
the emergence of a universal
form of humanism.
MILAD DOUEIHI 

Greek and Latin, an awareness of history
and an internal critique that
undermined the authority of an
institution as powerful as the Church.
For exotic humanism, the meeting of
East and West encouraged
comparativism, which in turn gave rise
to new sciences and disciplines, like
linguistics. And the humanism that
embraced all human societies gave rise,
among other things, to the structural
methodology. This enabled Lévi-Strauss,
in particular, to observe the world in its
globality and to discover an order
underlying the diversity of forms of
social organization and manifestations
of culture. For the father of
structuralism, this order was a mark of
the human mind.
It is also worth remembering that
these three forms of humanism
correspond to political developments:
the first was aristocratic, limited to a
privileged few; the second was
bourgeois, because it accompanied
Western industrial development; and the
third, democratic, as it excluded no one. 
It is this universal dimension that
urges me, in all modesty, to propose a
fourth humanism, digital humanism.
The fourth humanism
Digital humanism is the result of a
totally new convergence between our
complex, cultural heritage and a
technology that has become a space for
unprecedented sociability. This
convergence is new in the sense that it
redistributes concepts and objects, as
well as the practices associated with
them, within a virtual environment. 
And, like the three forms of
humanism defined by Lévi-Strauss,
digital humanism is linked to a major
discovery that opened multiple fields of
investigation – the new technologies,
which are overturning established
socio-cultural categories. 
Besides its technical and economic
aspects, which need constant scrutiny
and questioning, digital technology is in
the process of becoming a culture, in the
sense that it is changing our view of
objects, relations and values, and that it
is introducing new perspectives into the
field of human activity. 
1. “How the social sciences have humanised
technical civilisation,” a document dated 8 August
1956, first published in the UNESCO Courier n° 2008-
5, ‘Claude Lévi-Strauss: the view from afar.’ Available
in the digital archives of the Courier:
www.unesco.org/en/courier

Cultural practices like writing,
reading or communication, for example,
have continually been subject to
transformation since the arrival of
digital technologies. As the French
anthropologist Marcel Mauss [1872-
1950] pointed out, technology can play
an essential role, when access to the
technical instruments not only modifies
individual behaviour, but also the entire
surrounding culture.
Digital technologies can play an
even more essential role by radically
changing categories of space and time,
thus facilitating meetings between
cultures and their hybridization –
through the elimination of frontiers and
geographical distances, the immediacy
of communication, etc. 
Of course, they have their
limitations – digital technologies have
been based on mainly Western socio-
cultural models; they have not managed
to overcome linguistic barriers, and they
are not immune to abuse. Also, their
global distribution is unequal, which
can exaggerate inequalities between
rich and poor.
But despite this, digital technologies
have become a global reality, a universal
means of communication, even an
instrument for democratisation, as we
saw in the Arab Spring at the beginning
of 2011.
The hybrid space of the digital
culture is a new way of “living together”,
with its myths, discoveries and utopias.
It makes the global village a reality.
Digital humanism is one way of thinking
about this new reality. ■
Milad Doueihi (USA) is a religious
historian and Chair of Research on
Digital Cultures at Laval University
(Quebec). He is the author of several
books, including Digital Cultures
(Harvard University Press, 2011) and A
Perverse History of the Human Heart
(Harvard University Press, 1998)
J 'Flux' an interactive video installation by Belgian
artist, Thomas Israel in the entrance hall of the
International Youth Office in Brussels (Belgium)



DIGITAL
humanism?
Digital humanism is the result of
a totally new convergence
between our complex cultural
heritage and a technique that
has become a space for
unprecedented sociability. 
