While most countries acknowledge that
the representation of women in
decision-making structures is crucial for
change, women are rare at the highest
levels of decision-making. The Inter-
Parliamentary Union reports that
despite increased numbers of women in
parliaments, with an all-time global high
of 19.1% in both houses of parliament,
“the target of gender balance in politics
is still a distant one in many countries.” 
There have been some remarkable
stories, however, in the last few decades,
of women who have managed to
shatter the highest of glass ceilings,
surmounting all odds to enter a
predominantly male bastion. These
path-breaking women have managed
to make a difference in their countries,
while inspiring other women across the
globe to make sure their voices are
heard when policies affecting their
societies are being formulated.
Women like Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,
who made history in 2006, when she
was elected President of Liberia, making
her the first female head of state in
Africa. A champion of women’s rights,
the Harvard-educated President said
throughout her campaign that if she
won, it would encourage women across
Africa to seek high political office. The
devoted grandmother figure who has
braved prison and exile in her 30-year
political career, has shown a steely
determination to install peace in a
country ravaged by a decade of conflict.
Johnson Sirleaf was recently
presented the African Gender Award
2011, recognizing “Liberia’s efforts in the
enhancement of women’s rights with a
strong emphasis on girls’ education,
economic empowerment and
legislation to curb violence against
women.” “By promoting gender equality
and empowering our girls, we are also
SHIRAZ SIDHVA, USA-based Indian journalist



Women
political leaders
Some of history’s greatest leaders have been women, and yet, female political leaders are
rare in modern democracies. There have been fewer than 50 female heads of state in
recent times, and today, only 20 of the world’s 192 countries have women leaders at the
helm. In politics, progress towards gender parity may be slow but it is inevitable.
L Group shot of participants at the third forum
of the UN Alliance of Civilizations held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in May 2010. The only woman:
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, President of
Argentina  © UN Photo/Evan Schneider.

“lifting Liberia,” President Johnson
Sirleaf said in a recent speech to women
graduates who participated in an
economic empowerment programme. 
Iceland’s former President Vigdís
Finnbogadóttir also stresses the role of
education in women’s empowerment.
“My message to the women of the
world: get educated as much as you
can, and never accept a shorter
education than your brother. Skills,
reading, knowing what life is about, are
very important. Not everybody can go
to universities, but if your brothers are
lorry-drivers, learn something that can
be compared to that,” she urges.
President Vigdís, as she is known in
Iceland, became the world’s first
independently elected female president
in 1980..  “I paved the way, not only for
women, but also for men, in politics.
Because as soon as a woman succeeds,
she is paving the way for other women
and societies around the world,” she
points out. 
Iceland, along with other Nordic
countries, continues to top the world in
gender equality, and currently has a
woman prime minister, Jóhanna
Sigurdardóttir, at its helm. But when
President Vigdís got elected 30 years
ago, “it was considered so absurd that a
woman could lead a country. I think my
Icelanders were so courageous to take
that step. It was really breaking a
tradition.” Other women leaders that
preceded her, including Indira Gandhi of
India, Isabel Perón of Argentina, and
Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka,
came to power as “legacy leaders”,
taking over from their fathers or
husbands, while Israel’s Golda Meir and
Britain’s Margaret Thatcher were
nominated by their country’s political
parties. President Vigdís, who did not
belong to a political party, was re-
elected to the Presidency four
consecutive times (between 1980 and
1996), making her the world’s longest-
serving female political leader.  “The first
time, I won by a narrow margin, the
second time, it was not (narrow) .
Because then I had proved it was
possible that I could succeed as a
woman, and in spite of being a woman.” 
When it comes to leadership, does
gender really matter and does it affect
leadership qualities? The contexts in
which these and other women leaders
have emerged are entirely different, and
yet, research by political pundits shows
that certain traits are common among
women leaders. What are the obstacles
that women face to attain the highest
office in their lands? What are the
qualities that have allowed these
leaders to shatter the toughest of all
glass ceilings to blaze new trails, often
with no role models to follow? 
These were some of the questions
that intrigued Laura Liswood, a lawyer,
writer and international advocate for
women’s rights. As part of the Women’s
Leadership project in the United States,
of which she was director, she
embarked on an unprecedented
journey across the globe in 1992 to
interview 15 women leaders. Her
interviews with women presidents and
prime ministers – including Margaret
Thatcher, Gro Brundtland, Benazir
Pratibha Patil 
President of India
© Office of the President of India 
Jóhanna Sigurdardóttir 
Prime Minister of Iceland
© UNPhoto/Aliza Eliazarov 
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
President of Liberia
© UNESCO/Michel Ravassard
Laura Chinchilla 
President of Costa Rica
© UN Photo/Aliza Eliazarov
Jadranka Kosor 
Prime Minister of Croatia
©  UN Photo/Jenny Rockett  
Dalia Grybauskaitė
President of Lithuania
©  UNPhoto/Rick Bajornas
Angela Merkel
Chancellor of Germany
© UN Photo/Evan Schneider 
Mary McAleese
President of Ireland
© UN Photo/Evan Schneider 
Dilma Rousseff 
President of Brazil
©  Roberto Stuckert Filho/Presidência
da República/Agencia Brasil

some cases, gender matters very little,”
explains Michael A. Genovese, Professor
of Political Science, and Director of the
Institute for Leadership Studies at
Loyola Marymount University,
California.  “Margaret Thatcher serves as
an example of this. In other cases,
gender matters a good deal. Here,
Corazon Aquino comes to mind.”
According to him, it is “better to ask
when and under what circumstances
gender becomes more or less important.
There are built-in structural forces that
all leaders face, forces which compel
them to perform certain tasks and
responsibilities in similar or expected
ways:  ceremonial duties, constitutional
or legal requirements, role expectations.
These all bring out more or less common
responses from both male and female
leaders. It is in new and unstructured, or
crisis times that gender can make a great
deal of difference, situations where there
are not clear role expectations to fulfill.
Here, personality and gender differences
can make a huge difference.”
Not surprisingly, most women
leaders bring formidable educational
and professional qualifications to their
positions.  Many of them are authors,
lawyers, diplomats, and ministers before
taking on the top job in their countries.
A majority of claim that, besides
education, their main inspiration came
from a strong role model in childhood,
invariably a father or mother, who made
them believe that girls were as capable
as boys when it came to achieving
things.   
Michelle Bachelet, who was the first
female president of Chile, and before
that, the country’s first female Defence
minister is no stranger to blazing new
trails. “As a young mother and a
paediatrician, I experienced the
struggles of balancing family and career
and saw how the absence of childcare
prevented women from paid
employment,” she said, addressing a
crowd in Liberia on International
Women’s Day.   “The opportunity to help
remove these barriers was one of the
reasons I went into politics. It is why I
supported policies that extended health
and childcare services to families and
prioritized public spending for social
protection.”
Do women have different styles of
leadership that distinguish them from
men?  “It is commonly believed that
men exhibit more of a command style,
and women a more collegial style of
leadership,” explains Genovese, an
authority on global and national leaders
and author of 28 books. “While this
generalization has many exceptions,
there is something to the distinction.
Men tell, women talk. Men do
monologues, women have discussions,”
Genovese says.  “In terms of different
issues that might be promoted, it may
Bhutto, Corazon Aquino and Kazimiera
Prunskiene, former prime minister of
Lithuania, to name just a few – resulted
in a seminal book: Women World
Leaders: Fifteen Great Politicians Tell
Their Stories.
Women’s leadership
Political scientists have long debated
the role of gender in leadership. “In
Iveta Radicová  
Prime Minister of Slovakia
© European People's Party 
Micheline Calmy-Rey 
President of Switzerland
© Patrick Lazic/OIF
Cissé Mariam Kaïdama Sidibé
Prime Minister of Mali
© Primature du Mali
Rosario Fernández Figueroa 
Prime Minister of Peru
© Prime Minister’s office 
Sheikh Hasina Wajed 
Prime Minister of Bangladesh
© UNPhoto/ Eskinder Debebe 
Kamla Persad-Bissessar 
Prime Minister of Trinidad-and-
Tobago  © UN Photo/Aliza Eliazarov
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
 of Argentina
© UNPhoto/Jean Marc Ferre
Julia Gillard  
Prime Minister of Australia© UN
Photo/Mark Garten

Tarja Halonen
President of Finland
© UN Photo/Erin Siegal 
President

come as a surprise that women tend not
to aggressively promote “women’s
issues” when in office any more than
most men. Here differences of ideology
and partisanship are better indicators of
support for what are traditionally
thought of as women’s issues:
education, welfare support, etc.” 
Entrenched prejudice
Unlike their male counterparts, female
leaders in today’s democracies are
compelled to navigate deeply-
entrenched public prejudices, and are
judged more harshly than men by the
media and the people who elect them.
“There is no glass ceiling, just a thick
layer of men,” insists Liswood. In 1996,
Liswood co-founded  the Council of
Women World Leaders with President
Vigdís, and was appointed its secretary
general. “The urgency lies in preparing
women now for positions of influence, a
goal that cannot be achieved without
role models who are willing to foster
others in this direction,” Liswood says,
and this is where the Council is best
equipped to step in. 
In 1997, Liswood co-founded The
White House Project dedicated to
electing a woman president in the
United States. “I kept hearing so many
similar stories,” she says. “Experiences
were the same, though the leaders were
from different nations, cultures and
backgrounds. They seemed to have
received the same treatment for
reporters and their readers – they were
over-scrutinized. The press looked at
them first as women, excessively
critiquing their person – their clothes,
hair, handbags and scarves.” 
“The widespread perception that
women are not competent leaders is
probably the strongest barrier to greater
participation of women in policy-
making,” says Esther Duflo, professor of
development economics at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) in the United States. Duflo and her
colleagues, who co-founded the Abdul
Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab at MIT,
have done a series of ground-breaking
studies in India which show that women
leaders are evaluated more negatively
than male leaders, even though they
tend to provide better services like
clean drinking water and took
significantly fewer bribes. 
In an experiment using actors, Duflo
tested prejudices in hundreds of villages
in India, where one-third of the seats in
rural village councils have been
reserved for women since 1993, a
proportion recently raised to 50%. The
villagers were asked to listen to an
identical political speech—some were
exposed to speeches read by men,
others by women.  Villagers who had
never been exposed to a woman leader
were more likely to judge the female
speech-readers as incompetent. Voters
that had actually seen a woman in
power, however, had no such bias.
“Exposure reduces prejudices,”
according to Duflo, whose findings
show that public policy can influence
simple voter prejudice. 
Brinda Karat, a member of India’s
Communist Party of India (Marxist)
Politbureau and  a member of the
Upper House of Parliament, believes
that “women leaders do tend to raise
issues of concern to women more than
men do.” According to her, the country’s
decision to reserve 50 per cent of seats
for women at the “Panchayat” or local
level, is paying off. “The record of
women’s participation at the grassroots,
overcoming social and cultural barriers
is an inspiring chapter in India’s political
history and is expanding and
intensifying every day”, she says. Yet,
India’s parliament has less than 11%
women, and in most state assemblies,
there are even fewer women elected.  
“Does it therefore mean that women
are not capable or do not have merit on
their side?” asks Karat, who has worked
with women’s movements for the last 40
years.  “Clearly this would be an
outrageous and unacceptable
conclusion. The truth is that
discriminatory attitudes and practices in
the distribution of tickets keep women
out of elected politics. Just as women
fight discrimination in economic and
social spheres, it is necessary to fight
discrimination in the political sphere.
Any discrimination on the basis of
gender weakens democracy. The
struggle for equal representation is a
struggle to strengthen democratic and
citizenship rights.”
Working their way up
Women’s empowerment may be slow in
coming but both Genovese and
Liswood believe change is inevitable.
“Things have changed dramatically in
the past few decades,” Genovese says.
“When I published my book on women
leaders in 1993, I could literally name all
the women heads of government. Today
that number has shot up and women
are more represented throughout the
government than ever before (yet, still
below their percentage in the
population). 
“One of the keys is that today, more
and more women are serving in the
entry positions in politics, at the local
level, working their way up. This means
that there are more women in the
“minor leagues” of politics, more women
in the political pipeline who might earn
their way up the ladder. The chief cause
for this change has been first the
woman’s movement, second, that many
political parties – especially in Europe –
have quotas for women in campaigns,
third,  support groups that raise money
for women (e.g. Emily’s List), and finally,
changes in attitudes in society towards
women in public life.”
“There’s no question that things
have changed,” says Liswood.  “More to
the point is, have things changed
quickly enough?  In many countries,
women are coming into colleges,
getting degrees and entering the
workforce. But they’re seemingly having
a hard time upgrading to higher-level
positions. That I think is where we have
to focus.” 
“There will be a woman president (in
the United States) in my lifetime,”
Genovese believes.  “Perhaps the main
reason it is taking so long, apart from
the already mentioned issues, is that
major powers, super powers, with
significant military entanglements
across the globe, tend to look for men
who exude a certain toughness that
suggests the ability to use force and
even violence when it is deemed
necessary. Prejudices in this regard still
plague women, in spite of the fact that
some of the toughest leaders of the
post World War II era have been women
(Thatcher, Golda Meir, for example). This
stereotype is very hard to break.” ■
Excerpts and quotes taken from:
"Women World Leaders: Great Politicians Tell Their
Stories," by Laura A. Liswood, The Council Press,
2007.
Reprinted from First Edition: "Women World Leaders:
Fifteen Great Politicians Tell Their Stories," by Laura A.
Liswood, Pandora, an imprint of Harper Collins
Publishers,1995.
"Women As National Leaders", by Michael A.
Genovese (Editor), Sage Publications, 1993.
