Although significant advances have been made
in cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment,
cancer remains one of the leading causes of
death in all societies. Until the 1960s, cancer was
treated by surgery and radiation therapy. But, in
the last fifty years or so, as people gain further
understanding of the molecular basis of the
disease, and with the rapid development of new
chemical agents in the treatment of cancer,
chemotherapy has become one of the most
powerful weapons against the illness.
The first modern antitumor drug, nitrogen
mustard, was discovered by chance during World
War II. Researchers accidentally noticed that
mustard gas – which got its name from its yellow
colour and was used as a chemical weapon in the
First World War – can reduce white blood cell
counts. In 1942 a team of Yale pharmacologists,
including Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman,
used it to treat advanced lymphomas and found
that it could induce tumour regression if
administered systemically. In 1949 the U.S. Food
New chemotherapy cancer treatments aim to target the affected cells
without harming healthy tissues. Easier said than done, though.
Researchers are following a number of promising paths, including age-
old herbal remedies. One herb that has been used in traditional Chinese
medicine to treat digestive tract tumours is opening new horizons for
modern medicine. 
and Drug Administration (FDA) authorized
nitrogen mustard to be put on the market. This
gave a boost to the development of a number of
other chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment
of various types of cancer.
But, as we know, these chemotherapy drugs
can cause serious side effects. We had to wait
until the beginning of the third millennium for
the dawn of a new era of molecular targeted
cancer therapy. This consists of a new generation
of drugs that are not dispersed throughout the
body (damaging healthy tissue as they go) but
target precisely tissues where the cancer cells are
to be found. 
Avoiding collateral damage
Most of the drugs applied in clinic for the
treatment of cancer are organic compounds, but
there are also drugs based on inorganic
compounds, particularly metals. The use of
metals to treat human disease can be traced
back to Antiquity. For example, 2,500 years ago,

Herbs and metal:  
a pact against cancer
L Fragments of
cancerous cells.
© INSERM/J. Valladeau

the Chinese discovered that gold could be used
as a medicine. More recently, platinum, another
precious metal, has become the basis for one of
the most frequently used anticancer treatments
in the world, cisplatin, shown in 1965 by an
American chemist, Barnett Rosenberg and his
colleagues, to block the spread of cancer cells.
Once again, though, the side effects were
toxic, which encouraged researchers to develop
drugs based on other metals, such as ruthenium.
Thanks to the pioneering work of chemists like
Michael J. Clarke (USA), Bernhard K. Keppler
(Austria), Peter J. Sadler (UK) and their colleagues,
ruthenium seems to be a particularly attractive
alternative to platinum. Like iron, it is able to bind
to transferrin, the blood serum protein that
transports iron to the organs. But, instead of
spreading throughout the body, it accumulates in
tumours, attracted by cancer cells, which have
approximately 5−15 times more transferrin
receptors than normal cells. In this way
ruthenium directly targets the cancer cell and
destroys it. Apart from their great precision,
compared with their platinum counterparts,
certain ruthenium complexes have the capacity
to inhibit tumour metastasis – in other words to
prevent the spread of cancer to other parts of the
body.
A novel strategy
Broadening its field of research to ruthenium
complexes, our research group has recently
reported that the combination of ruthenium and
the active ingredients of a Harmel (Peganum
harmala) may provide a novel strategy for
developing anticancer drugs. The powdered
seeds of this plant have long been used in herbal
formulas of traditional Chinese medicine to cure
tumours of the digestive tract. Today, some of the
chemical complexes formed by the alliance of
metals and herbs are able to halt the spread of
cancer cells much more effectively than cisplatin.
What is more, we have noticed that these
complexes can simultaneously induce apoptosis
and cytoprotective autophagy in human cancer
cells (see below). To our knowledge, this is the
first time this dual action has been demonstrated.
Apoptosis, sometimes known as
“programmed cell death” is a normal process that
results in the death of certain ‘damaged’ cells, at a
given moment. But with cancer cells, apoptosis is
switched off or deregulated, which may explain
their continuous proliferation. So, some of the
latest research in oncology is focusing on
molecules that can induce the suicide of cancer
cells. 
Autophagy, on the other hand, which literally
means “eating oneself,” is a mechanism that
enables a cell partially to digest its own contents,
in order to survive. But it is a double-edged
sword, as, although it can mean the survival of
healthy cells to the detriment of ailing cells, the
inverse can also be true. The molecules we are
working on aim to activate autophagy as a way to
destroy cancer cells that are resistant to
apoptosis. This is a new approach in the
treatment of cancer, which should help combat
the disease.
According to statistics provided by the U.S.
National Cancer Institute (NCI), the survival rates
of some types of cancer have been greatly
improved in the last few decades. Even so, cure
rates for certain types of cancer remain very low.
For example, the overall 5-year survival rate for
liver cancer is less than 10%. The United Nations
International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) estimates that approximately 760 million
people died of cancer in 2008, and the number
could reach 1320 million in 2030. The war is not
over yet. 
The molecules we
are working on
aim to activate
autophagy as a
way to destroy
cancer cells that
are resistant to
apoptosis. This is a
new approach in
the treatment of
cancer, which
should help
combat the
disease.

L Cell culture: apoptosis in a
dopaminergic neuron. 
© INSERM/P. Michel
Anlong Xu is Vice-president for Research and
Development, and Professor of Molecular
Immunology and Biology at Sun Yat-sen
(Zhongshan) University, Guangzhou, China. He
is the Director of State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, and serves on the expert
committee on new drugs at the State Food
and Drug Administration of China (SFDA). He
is also a member of the Pharmacopoeia
Commission of China.
