For many people in the Bantu language countries of Africa, the term Ubuntu/botho
encapsulates all the qualities of a respected member of society. But the term is also used
by Africanist scholars as a critique of colonialist doctrine and even forms the core of a
humanist ideology upon which the new democratic South Africa is constructed.



I am because 

MICHAEL ONYEBUCHI EZE 
Ask anyone on the streets of Harare,
Johannesburg, Lusaka or Lilongwe (in Southern
and Eastern Africa) what they understand by
Ubuntu/botho and they will probably list the
virtues to which a person in these societies is
expected to aspire – such as compassion,
generosity, honesty, magnanimity, empathy,
understanding, forgiveness and the ability to
share. Indeed, Ubuntu/botho (or the local
equivalent in the various Bantu language
groups)1 is understood as the very definition of
‘person’ or ‘personhood’. But the term
Ubuntu/botho impregnates societies in the
region to a much greater extent, forming the
basis for communitarian ethics, discourses on
identity and even a bourgeoning pan-African
ideology. 
In terms of contemporary Africanist
discourse, though, Ubuntu/botho is best
understood as a critique of the logic of
colonialism – the process of attempting to
“humanize” or “civilize” non-Western cultures
through colonization. Colonialism was a
powerful and condescending narrative that
thrived through a pretext of “humanizing” or
“civilizing” non-Western peoples. The
consequences of this false doctrine of humanism
were to become the bedrock of colonial practices
in Africa, as an institutionalized form of social
Darwinism2 nurtured by racialist capitalism. 
Racialist capitalism is a theory in which a
person’s race determines his or her life choices or
potential, like the kind of job to have, where to
live, the kind of person to marry, the kind of
school to attend, and so on. The effects of this
theory on the South African experience can be
seen in the many draconian laws aimed at
curbing the potentialities of the black person.
This system motivated the 1913 Land Act that
forbade blacks from buying lands in South Africa;
the colour bar of 1918; the Bantu Education Act
of 1953 which abolished the teaching of African
history; the job Reservation Act which gave
priority to whites in matters of employment; the
various segregation policies from as early as 1907
that restricted the movement of blacks and
reduced them to mere instruments of labour. 
As early as 1858, the South African-Boer
constitution had already ruled out any form of
equality between blacks and whites in matters of
State or Church. The prevailing argument was
that forced labour was ordained by God as a
divine privilege for the white race to claim
authority of domination over blacks, as the then
president of the South-African Republic, Paul
Kruger, informed his Volksraad [Peoples’ Council]
in August 1897 – “Our constitution wants no
equality and equality is also against the Bible,
because social classes were also applied by God.”
And, later, in his Memoirs, he wrote: “…where
there were only a handful of white men to keep
hundreds of thousands of blacks in order,
severity was essential. The black man had to be
1. The term Ubuntu/botho is generally derived from a
vernacular mode of referring to a ‘person’ among the peoples
of southern, eastern, (some western) and central Africa,
generally referred to as the Bantu language groups. The Shona
call a ‘person’ in the singular munhu and in the plural vanhu.
The Zulu, Xhosa, and Ndebele call a ‘person’ umuntu in the
singular and abantu in the plural. The Sotho and Tswana refer
to a ‘person’ as muthu in the singular and bathu in the plural.
2. A derivative of Charles Darwin’s theory of natural selection,
Social Darwinism means that stronger nations have the moral
authority or even an obligation to conquer, subjugate and
dominate weaker nations. It is simply the natural order of
things. 
Colonialism was a
powerful and
condescending
narrative that
thrived through a
pretext of
“humanizing” or
“civilizing” non-
Western peoples.
The consequences
of this false
doctrine of
humanism were
to become the
bedrock of
colonial practices
in Africa, as an
institutionalized
form of social
Darwinism
nurtured by
racialist
capitalism. 

taught that he came second, that he belongs to
the inferior class which must obey and learn.” 
This mindset would form the political
blueprint for South Africa’s colonial history and
was the foundation upon which the new South
Africa gained national sovereignty.  But if the
South African colonial state had been founded
upon the ideology of social Darwinism, what
should be the ideological foundation of the new,
democratic, independent state? This is where
Ubuntu/botho comes in. 
As a public discourse, Ubuntu/botho has
gained recognition as a peculiar form of African
humanism, encapsulated in the following Bantu
aphorisms, like Motho ke motho ka batho babang;
Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu (a person is a
person through other people). In other words, a
human being achieves humanity through his or
her relations with other human beings. But this
understanding does not need to generate an
oppressive structure, where the individual loses
his or her autonomy in an attempt to maintain a
relationship with an ‘other’. 
Many Africanist scholars would describe
Ubuntu/botho as an arbitrary communitarian
ethics that admits the individual’s good and
welfare only as a secondary necessity. But a
critical reading of this condition of relationship
to others might suggest that a person’s humanity
flourishes through a process of relation and
distance, of uniqueness and difference. A
realization of the subjective gifts (of humanity)
we bear to each other motivates an
unconditional desire to view and harness other
people’s uniqueness and difference, not as a
threat but as a complement to one’s own
humanity. The Christian African philosopher, J. S.
Mbiti’s now classic phrase, “I am, because we are;
and since we are therefore I am”, captures a key
feature of this kind of subjective formation
through relation and distance. Mbiti subscribes
to an affirmation of human subjectivity that puts
communitarian good before individual good. I
disagree, however, with this prioritizing of the
community over the individual. Neither is prior.
The relation with the ‘other’ is one of subjective
equality, where the mutual recognition of our
different but equal humanity opens the door to
unconditional tolerance and a deep appreciation
of the ‘other’ as an embedded gift that enriches
one’s humanity.
A unifying ideology?
Within the contemporary history of South Africa,
there are three main ways in which Ubuntu has
been understood:
First is the assumption that Ubuntu is merely
an anachronistic philosophy produced by African
academics. Here Ubuntu functions as an
alternative narrative to replace colonial logic, a
desperate discourse of identity – a
sledgehammer kind of ethics that helps us to
deal with the traumas of modernity and
globalization. The argument is that, since we
cannot positively identify Ubuntu as an authentic
historical culture, it remains an invented
discourse, in an alien format. Being ‘invented’,
Ubuntu is more or less an ‘empty concept’
through which Africanist academics perform a
supple manoeuvre of identity formation using an
‘imported’ cultural nationalism. Evidence is
sought from different African cultural traditions
to homogenize a range of values that are then
represented as Ubuntu. Ubuntu is thus
generalized as a universal African value,
irrespective of the actual historical context of the
societies that practice it. However, Ubuntu does
not need to generate a homogenous historicity3
to become an authentic African value. And
neither does a lack of historical authenticity
deprive Ubuntu of such normative legitimacy. 
The second conjecture is that Ubuntu has the
character of an ideology, appropriated for
political ends, as was evident in its application
during the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
(TRC), and the initial draft constitution of South
Africa. As an ideology it can be applied as a
‘magic wand’ to deal with every emergent social
crisis. And as an ideology, its usage can also be
abused and ceases to be an ethical value,
becoming a value-commodity which is then
appropriated to create a positive corporate or
brand image, as in ‘Ubuntu security’, ‘Ubuntu
restaurant’, ‘Ubuntu linux’, ‘Ubuntu cola’, etc. 
The third sequence is a vision of history in
which Ubuntu/botho is considered within the
historical context in which it emerged. Being
historical, it also gains an emotional and ethical
legitimacy, since it is signified as a good that
remains internal to the practices of a community
where Ubuntu/botho values are invoked. 
The question, then, is whether
Ubuntu/botho, construed as an ideology,
precludes all possibilities of creative historicity?4
My answer is no! The context in which
Ubuntu/botho emerged (even as an ideology) in
the political history of South Africa was an
attempt to configure a theory of political
succession that is consistent with the vision of an
3. The idea that African historiography is a single historical
narrative irrespective of many cultures, people(s) and traditions
that inhabit the geographical place called Africa. 
4. Creative historicity argues that history is neither a fixation on
the past nor a mere chronology of events. Good history is open
to multiple influences and contexts. 
A beach for Whites only in
Cape Town, South Africa, in
January 1970
As a public discourse, Ubuntu/botho 
has gained recognition as a peculiar
form of African humanism.
Everyday life under
Apartheid

emergent national imaginary. Irrespective of its
doubtful origins, the moment at which
Ubuntu/botho became a public virtue that is
easily recognized by all South Africans,
constitutes its historicity. The lack of authentic
historical origins (in written records, or as a
nuanced cultural dogma) does not neutralize its
credibility. 
Understood as a narrative of a new national
consciousness, Ubuntu not only offers an
emotional legitimacy to displace the old political
order; it also gives the new political order a
sense of identity and political purpose. While the
old order thrived on a notion of citizenship
based on discrimination and difference, the new
regime attempted to gain legitimacy by trying
to forge a notion of democratic citizenship that
thrives through inclusion and civic virtues. But
the new dispensation has to be based on a
system that excludes the oppressive structures
of the past, and adopts instead a system of
values that is built on a notion of rights and the
unconditional dignity of the human person. At
this point, the ‘notion’ of Ubuntu assumes an
ethical character in forging a new sense of
national identity. 
Critics of the use of Ubuntu as a unifying
ideology argue that it is merely an incoherent,
invented ethics with no history. But ideologies
do not predate history; they emerge as a
response to specific issues within a historical
epoch, challenging, correcting or displacing a
mindset (or old ideology). The challenge, then, is
to see whether Ubuntu can be rehabilitated as
an ideology, focusing primarily on its normative
essence, or whether the lack of historicity will
always deny it any real substance. 
At the same time, the practice of the human
virtues through which a Bantu becomes a
Munhu, Umuntu, or a Muntu (etc) is not external,
but internal to the context where it is practiced.
Yet, Ubuntu has been able to transcend this
moral relativism by generating an ethical
practice, which all South Africans, irrespective of
their socio-cultural background, have judged to
be good. This evaluative norm was to become
the inspiration for building the new South
Africa, guarded by the need for reconciliation
and not division; forgiveness, not resentment;
understanding, not vengeance; and ubuntu, not
victimization (see the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission Documents of South Africa). These
were time-honoured values to which most
South Africans already aspired, paving the way
for a new national imaginary. And this gives
Ubuntu its moral authority. ■
Michael Onyebuchi Eze is a Nigerian-American
visiting research scholar at the Center for African
Studies at Stanford University, (USA). He received
his PhD in Intellectual History from Universität
Witten-Herdecke (Germany) and taught African
studies at the universities of Augsburg and
Frankfurt. He is author of two books, The Politics of
History in Contemporary Africa and Intellectual
History in Contemporary South Africa (Palgrave-
Macmillan, 2010).
