Her country was still at war when she set about building
her house. First she took a wheelbarrow. She carried and
buried the remains of the 72 people who had been
murdered in front of her, mostly refugees in the diocese
where she worked. Then she went out on the battlefields to
look for children who had survived. “Some of them had no
eyes, others no arms.” She cared for them, fed them... but
they also had to be housed.
Maggy Barankitse was 37 when the civil
war broke out in Burundi, one of the
smallest and poorest countries in the
African continent. From 1993 to the first
years of the millennium, the conflict
between Tutsis and Hutus saw over
200,000 people lose their lives, but hers
was spared, and she saved thousands of
children in her home region of Ruyigi,
near to the border with Tanzania, as well
as across the entire country. “Today I am
the happiest mother in the world – I
have 20,000 children,” she says, with a
radiant smile. “We have raised the
children of a generation of fratricide and
created a new generation. We made no
distinction between the children of
victims and the children of criminals –
they were all just children who needed
to be loved and comforted. Three
quarters of my colleagues today –
doctors, psychologists, economists,
nurses, teachers – were Tutsi and Hutu
children who grew up in the Maison
Shalom.”
One shouldn’t think of this house as
having four walls and a roof. For 17
years, “Mama Maggy” used different
places that were lent or given to her to
house the war orphans, before creating
three large centres. “But I realized,” she
admits, “that children who grow up in
orphanages lose their sense of
responsibility. So I closed down the
orphanages and opened a series of
outreach centres for the association. I
built 3000 little houses across the
country where siblings could live
together! I also placed children in
families. I compare this house to a boat,
with God as our captain.”
A devoted Christian, Maggy
Barankitse has just one religion – love.
JASMINA ŠOPOVA

Mama Maggy
and her 20 000children
A meeting with Maggy Barankitse

“Men and women have enough love in
their hearts to say ‘no’ to doom, no to
fratricidal hate,” insists this woman, who
held a ‘democratic poll’ of the children
when they were looking for a name for
the association. “It was the children who
gave their house the name Shalom. It is a
Hebrew word, but has become universal,
as it means ‘peace.’ The little Muslim
children also raised their hands when it
came to the vote.” 
Over the years she built the children
a centre for vocational training –
teaching plumbing, carpentry,
agriculture, animal husbandry and
dressmaking. But her greatest pride and
joy is the hospital she founded in Ruyigi,
with a mother and baby unit. “I opened a
large hospital because, that way, I will no
longer have to repair all the damage. I
had enough of receiving children who
had lost their mothers while they were
still in nappies. No-one in the world can
replace the tenderness of a mother. No
institution, no centre can stand in for a
mother. I built a beautiful maternity
centre and started a nursing school. I
knocked on every door to get hold of an
ambulance. And then I went to see
mothers in the villages to tell them they
could call us if ever a mother was in
need.” 
For those who are HIV positive or are
suffering from AIDS, Maggy Barankitse
opened a special centre where they can
not only be fed, cared for and treated
with antivirals, but also get advice. “They
learn how to organize themselves
through associations and set up little co-
operatives. Look at this…” she says,
pointing to the beautiful red dress she is
wearing as she talks to us, “they made it!
The main thing is not to help these
women, but to help them help
themselves.”  
It is difficult to put figures to the work
of Maison Shalom. “As we work across
the entire country, I cannot tell you how
many people we have supported. The
schools are for all the children living in
the communities where we built them.
The libraries and cinemas we set up are
open to everyone.”    
Today, the association employs 220
people, without counting the volunteers,
and receives support from over 40
charities, institutions and governments.
Maggy Barankitse is very convincing,
even though she does not hold back
from criticising certain forms of
behaviour – or perhaps it is because of
this. While UNICEF is one of the friends
of Maison Shalom, she is outraged at
the hundreds of plastic schools bearing
the name UNICEF, dotted all over the
country. “Rather than send us plastic
manufactured in western factories that
is toxic for the children, why not help us
to buy straw, which is much better
adapted to our climate, so that we can
help build our own schools and earn
money at the same time, to pay for our
children’s education?”
She pulls no punches with UNESCO
either, where she recently came for the
no voice of their own and needing a
spokesperson! Even if they speak
neither English nor French, they have to
be given a chance to have their say.” 
And to conclude the chapter of
remonstrations – “I would like the
United Nations agencies to take a good
look at themselves. They should stop
meeting for grand conferences, they
should stop focusing on statistics, and
be more present at grassroots level.” 
“I, myself, live in the back of beyond,
in a region no-one has heard of,” says
Maggy Barankitse, becoming more and
launch of the Education for All Global
Monitoring Report 2011, which is
devoted to the impact of armed
conflicts on education. “It is this little
girl, a rape victim in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, who we spoke about
today at the conference – she is the one
you should have brought here instead
of me. She should tell her own story. The
doors to conferences and meetings
have to be opened to these people.
They must not be considered as having
more animated. “I live in the ‘danger
zone’ where journalists come to take a
photo or two and high-tail it back out
again, where foreign civil servants
spend three weeks before setting off for
Zanzibar for a rest! When I started my
work, I was shocked by this kind of
behaviour. But later on I understood –
we have to let our tongues loose and
speak. If I do not criticize, it means that I
do not love. There is no love without
truth.” ■

L Maggy Barankitse is particularly proud of this rural hospital she founded in Ruyigi, Burundi.
