Locked in the cycle of violence
Some 28 million children are deprived of education because of armed conflict
around the world. “Armed conflict remains a major roadblock to human
development in many parts of the world, yet its impact on education is widely
neglected,” said UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova. War destroys not only
schools and educational infrastructure, but also the hope and ambitions of
whole generations.
The 2011 Education for All Global Monitoring Report “The hidden crisis:
Armed conflict and education” points out that the problem is not only the
conflict itself, but also what comes along with it. 
Children drop out of school or their parents forbid them to go. There are
constant threats to children and teachers in and outside school boundaries. The
younger generation is terrorized, raped and kidnapped. Many abducted children
are put into the armed forces to fight. If they want to live and see their families
again, they have to go and kill. Rape is often used as a war tactic and in certain
countries the young are particularly targeted because they are defenseless.
“I was just coming back home from the river to fetch water,” says Minova, 15,
South Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo. “Two soldiers came up to me
and told me that if I refuse to sleep with them, they will kill me. They beat me
and ripped my clothes. One of the soldiers raped me. …My parents spoke to a
commander and he said that his soldiers do not rape, and that I am lying. I
recognized the two soldiers, and I know that one of them is called Edouard.”
(Human Rights Watch, 2009). 
While it is evident that armed conflicts undermine education, it is less
obvious that the failures of education can fuel conflicts. Yet an educational
system that fails to provide young people with the knowledge and skills to
avoid unemployment and poverty,  as well as the requisite tools to learn “living
together” and respect for other people, becomes an underground source of
hatred and discord.
Mila Zourleva, 22, Bulgarian student and intern, UNESCO Division of Public
Information
