Inequality between men and
women remains deeply
rooted in many societies.
Women are too often denied
access to education and
health care, they face
occupational segregation
and gender wage gaps, they
are under-represented in
decision-making processes
and they suffer violence.
Michelle Bachelet takes on
these challenges as the first
Executive Director of UN
Women, the new United
Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the
Empowerment of Women.
Can you tell us what inspired you to
make violence against women one of
the key priorities of UN Women? And
what types of violence are women
subjected to in the world?
Violence against women is one of the
most widespread human rights
violations. It is one of five priority areas
UN Women will focus on because
making progress in this area can
accelerate progress for women across
many fields. For example, a woman who
lives free from violence has much better
prospects to find a good job, seek an
education, care for her health and act as
a leader in her community or elsewhere.
Women face many types of violence.
Many societies in the world today have
some elements of this, and the
prevalence rates can be as high as 76%
if you look at women across their
lifetimes. Specific forms of violence
include domestic violence, rape, sexual
violence as a weapon of war, early
marriage and female genital mutilation.
What other priorities are you planning
on tackling and how will you mobilize
the necessary resources to achieve
your goals?
We will actively support and look for
creative ways to empower women
economically, increase women’s roles as©

Global
champion
for
women
MICHELLE BACHELET was interviewed by Jasmina Šopova

leaders and advocates of change, bring
women to the centre of peace and
security processes, and integrate gender
equality priorities across national
planning. Part of mobilizing resources to
achieve these goals will be to
demonstrate how much of a
contribution women make to
development, not just for themselves,
but for their societies at large. There is
growing evidence of this. The most
recent World Economic Forum Global
Gender Gap Index Report, for example,
shows that out of 114 countries, it is
those with greater gender equality that
are more competitive and grow faster. 
What human and financial resources
does UN Women currently have at its
disposal? Is it enough to achieve your
mission?
UN Women inherited the resources of
the four UN entities that have been
combined to create it. Building on these
resources and moving forward, as
recommended in the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive proposal of January
2010, a minimum annual budget of US
$500 million is foreseen. This is the
target we will be working towards.
Are you planning to prioritize certain
countries? If so, which ones, and for
what reasons?
We will work with all UN Member States
that request our assistance, both
developing and developed countries. UN
Women currently has varying presence
in approximately 80 countries and we
will need to strengthen our exiting
presence in some countries where there
is the greatest need. We will be doing this
over time and as we build our
institutional capacities and resources.
Within countries, a priority will be to
reach the most marginalized groups of
women. They are the most in need of UN
Women’s support and reaching them can
make the most effective use of our
resources. As  UNICEF has started to
demonstrate, investing in the most
marginalized part of the population
offers higher rates of return.
What is the role of gender equality in
the Millenium Development Goals?
How do you plan to give it more
importance?
Achieving Gender equality – Goal three,
is fundamental to achieving all of the
other MDG goals. We will continue to
advocate  on the  critical  linkage
between gender equality and all the
other goals—on poverty, health,
education, the environment —as we
move towards the target date of 2015. 
One MDG issue that is particularly
important is maternal mortality.
Globally, we have not made nearly
enough progress. We can—and must—
do much more. Saving more lives in
childbirth requires basic knowledge and
inexpensive tools that could be readily
available everywhere, if governments
and the international community
decide to really make that a priority.
The number of women elected as
Heads of State and Government and of
UN Agencies has been rising in the past
few years. Has this already had
positive effects on critical issues
concerning women around the world? 
If we look back in time, we can see that
enormous progress has been made over
the last 100 years. Although challenges
remain, gender equality has a
momentum that it has never had before
at any other point in history. This is true
both on the international level and in
most countries. 
This is because women have taken
leadership roles as advocates for gender
equality—at many levels, whether in
communities or as heads of state.
Women leaders have made sure that a
growing number of people understand
that we must bring women fully into
our economies, we must end violence
against women, we must tap into
women’s capacities as agents for
changes that benefit everyone. And that
we must bring resources and take the
actions necessary to achieve these
goals—as we have now done in part
through the creation of UN Women as a
global champion for women. ■
Michelle Bachelet, who trained as a surgeon, is the first Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN Women. The former President of Chile (2006 to 2010)
was noted for her government’s investment in pension reform, social protection
programmes for women and children, and research and development, despite the
financial crisis. Other initiatives included tripling the number of free early child-care
centres for low-income families and the completion of some 3,500 child-care
centres around the country. On 14 September 2010 when she became chief of the
new UN agency, Ms Bachelet pledged to make it a “strong champion” for gender
equality.
UN Women
In July 2010, the United Nations General Assembly created UN Women to accelerate
the Organization’s goals on gender equality and the empowerment of women.
Launched officially on 24 February 2011, UN Women merges four parts of the UN
system: the Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW), International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women (OSAGI)
and the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). 
UN Women’s main goal is to support inter-governmental bodies and Member States in their formulation of global and
national policies, standards and norms on gender equality. It can also hold the UN system accountable for its own
commitments on gender equality, including regular monitoring of system-wide progress.
Website: http://www.unwomen.org/ 
