It all began the day Khalida Brohi, now
22 years old, learned about the custom
of karo kari, or honour killing. Honour
killing is the murder of a woman or an
act of extreme violence against her
perpetrated by her male relatives when
she is perceived as having brought
dishonour upon her family. Horrified,
Khalida vowed to fight this heinous
tradition. Unable to take direct action to
oppose violence against women, she
began writing poems about karo kari
and within her community she
launched an aggressive awareness
raising campaign against honour killing.

The young sughar
from Balochistan
Khalida Brohi’s conviction
comes across instantly from
behind her bright eyes and
inimitable warm smile. Yet
who could imagine that this
petite young woman from a
conservative tribal
community in Balochistan,
southwestern province of
Pakistan, has been a change
maker since age 16, when
she first took a stand
against the centuries-old
tradition of honour killing? 
Noshan Abbas meets 
KHALIDA BROHI
I Young women learning to weave in a community
centre in Karachi, Pakistan 
But in a religious, conservative
community whose underpinnings are
encapsulated in the common proverb
‘zar, zan , zameen’ (women, gold and
land) - the three main possessions
directly linked to man’s honour – trying
to incite local community leaders to
make the distinction between ancestral
custom and religious practice was much
more dangerous than Khalida imagined. 
According to Human Rights
Commission of Pakistan (HRCP)
chairperson I. A Rehman, “Honour killing
used to be practiced only in remote
districts but now it happens in
metropolitan cities, in Karachi, Lahore
and Peshawar, for example. The settled
districts have acquired this evil too. It’s
one of the biggest problems women
face. Honour killings are not always
reported, although since the women’s
act of 2006, cases have started being
brought to the attention of authorities.
We have only an approximate figure,
which amounts to 800 to 1,000 killings a
year- there may be marginal variations
in the number from year to year but the
situation remains the same.”
Despite challenges of all kinds,
Khalida helped found in 2004 the

mindsets, she faced the wrath of the
traditional patriarchal status quo. Her life
was threatened and she was ultimately
expelled from her community. 
Tradition versus tradition
“In 2008 our organization faced several
threats against our safety,” recalls Khalida.
“We faced opposition from religious
leaders and community tribal leaders.
The time came when we had to leave
everything and flee.” At that point
Khalida’s father took her to Karachi to
safety so that she could finish her studies. 
But Khalida wasn’t about to give up
on this crucial issue. “While everything
had come to a halt, I kept on thinking
about what had gone wrong in the
programme. ‘I respect tradition,’ I
thought to myself. Suddenly I realized
we had to promote positive traditions
that could help end honour killing. And
that was how we came to work with
locals as our allies.”
Turning this inclusive strategy into
action still required perseverance from
Khalida and her team of 40 young
people. “We advocated the same cause
but less aggressively,” says Khalida , who
used local traditions to her advantage
and confronted the tribal leaders who
had previously threatened her. “In our
culture, you do not kick someone out of
your house - it’s not done.” Khalida
showed up with her team at the house of
one of the leaders, who was thus forced
against his will to listen and talk to the
group of persistent youths. “We spoke in
the local language and explained how
we wanted to promote local traditions
such as embroidery, music and poetry.”
Three leaders were responsive and even
clerics started giving sermons about
women’s rights in accordance to Islam. 
Promoting positive local traditions by
producing embroidery that is later
marketed through PDI, Sughar centres
have also provided a female friendly
platform for women to create financial
elbow room. In addition they receive
value added training and basic
education training in areas such as math,
writing and reproductive health.  For
Khalida, this has meant a window of
opportunity to raise awareness against
honour killing.  “Women’s attitude
towards honour killing is that of
acceptance. We are working to change
that by explaining the status and rights
of women as stated in Islam…they of
course become receptive to that,” she
says. Convinced women’s effacement in
the face of honour killing is a prime
cause for its continuation, Khalida has
targeted women but without neglecting
the involvement of men. Through
creative avenues such as cricket
tournaments, interactive theater, SMS,
FM radio, info-activism and digital
advocacy, PDI advocates for the rights of
women by educating men. With the
consent of tribal leaders, discussions with
men using the Islamic argument of
women’s rights are also organized. 
When asked how she measures the
effect of her work, Khalida answers, "We
started with 14 girls on our team and
now we have 40 both male and female
members so I feel attitudes are changing.
I have heard of cases of honour killing in
neighbouring areas, but not in my
community for the past three years.”
Brave Role Model 
With the help of savings and the
support of funding from various
organizations, Khalida Brohi has set up
Sughar centres in several districts of
organization Participatory Development
Initiatives (PDI). It has established
innovative ideas such as the Sughar
(which means skilled and confident
woman in the local language)
Programme to end honour killing by
enabling economic empowerment
among tribal women. 
“Over time I realized that most of
the honour killings were of those
women who were sitting at home.
Those who bring in income every
month are considered of value to the
family, and this also builds their
capacities for decision making and
contribution in their households and
lives,” says Khalida, zeroing in on the
power of making money. But she also
understood the challenge of changing
mindsets: “There are three main reasons
why honour killing happens. First is our
bad policies at the government level,
second is the negative perception of
women’s status and third, probably the
biggest reason, is that women accept
customs as their fate.” But before Khalida
embarked on the challenge of changing

Balochistan, becoming a fellow of the
Unreasonable Institute as well as
winning the Young Champion Award
and YouthActionNet fellowship award.
She has a ‘Wake Up Campaign Against
Honour Killing’ on Facebook that
updates members on honour killing
cases and other relevant information.
But Khalida is conscious that despite the
support from family, international
organizations and her team, naysayers
still exist: “Those who are against what
we do in our community are in minority,
so they don’t speak about it publicly,
but I know they’re waiting for us to slip
and make a mistake. That is why I am so
particular about making sure we try to
make no mistakes whatsoever.”
Expanding its outreach to women,
PDI was active in a 2008 national
programme, the Benazir Bhutto
Government Land Distribution to
landless Sindhi peasant women. It came
up with the programme Land for
Women and took responsibility for
monitoring the process. When major
discrepancies were detected, however,
PDI launched a support program for
women with the help of Oxfam.
Through the local radio, they
highlighted the land programme in far
flung areas; they provided help for
filling in forms, transport to open legal
courts and legal support to women who
faced land issue problems. “Within three
years the land for women programme
provided land for 50% of the 3000
women participants,” says Khalida.
Shuttling between Balochistan and
Karachi where she is finishing her
undergraduate studies in international
relations, sociology and economics,
Khalida has also worked to help flood
victims in the area of Sindh. Receiving
support from Oxfam and the Rockdale
foundation, she raised funds for 25,000
families in nearby areas, provided relief
for 12,000 people and helped establish
homes in the recovery phase. 
Looking back, Khalida identifies her
biggest struggle: maintaining the
culturally defined concept of a good
reputation, a sacred and often life
determining notion in her society. “The
issue of being or not being a ‘decent’ girl
becomes an issue as soon as you step
out of your house”. Even though
Khalida’s parents have been pillars of
strength and inspiration for her, Khalida
remembers even her mother being
upset when she was first invited to
Sydney for an Oxfam launch of a youth
partnership. Khalida laughs as she
recalls her mother’s words: “You will not
find a husband!”  
But Khalida is willing to brave the
risks and continue her battle to inspire
women to demand and protect their
basic human right to life.  ■
L Khalida Brodi (front, left) with some of the “Sughar” programme participants.  © Participatory Development Initiatives (PDI)
Noshan Abbas, 26, is a journalist from
Islamabad, Pakistan. She works for Al
Jazeera, BBC Urdu and BBC South Asia
online. For Plan International and
Rutgers WPF, she created Pakistan's
first Framework Policy for Adolescents.
