possibility. He concludes that, “as there
is a high degree of similarity between
the upper haze layer on Venus and the
terrestrial stratospheric sulphate layer
(Junge layer), which is an important
regulator of the Earth’s climate and the
abundance of ozone, these
experimental and modelling results may
be relevant to stratospheric aerosol
chemistry and the applications of this
chemistry for geoengineering of the
Earth’s climate.” 
We are still at the stage of
hypotheses. SO2 is a gas that, at high
concentrations, can provoke lung and
cardio-vascular diseases, while
rendering the oceans more acidic and
corroding metals, etc. Researchers are
agreed that there is still a long way to
go before even thinking of applying this
kind of “sun screen” on Earth.  



Venus to the rescue
Jasmina Šopova
Does Venus hold the key to our
deliverance from global warming? In a
press release dated 5 November 2010,
the French National Scientific Research
Centre (CNRS) announced that an
international team of scientists had just
located a layer of sulphur dioxide (SO2)
in the upper atmosphere of Venus. “SO2
is of particular interest [to them] since
this gas could be used to cool down the
Earth via a geo-engineering process put
forward by Chemistry Nobel Laureate
Paul Crutzen [1995]”, explains the CNRS
communiqué.
Five years ago, the celebrated Dutch
chemist and meteorologist imagined an
emergency solution to accelerated
warming, which consisted of releasing a
million tons of sulphur into the
stratosphere.  Via a natural chemical
reaction, this would turn into sulphur
dioxide, then into particles of sulphate.
By reflecting the sun’s rays, these
particles would reduce the average
temperature of Earth. This idea was
inspired by research in the 1970s by the
Russian climatologist, Mikhail Budyko,
as well as by the eruption of the
Pinatubo volcano (Philippines), which
threw 10 million tonnes of sulphur into
the air in 1991, leading to a drop in the
Earth’s mean temperature of half a
degree the following year.
Xi Zhang, who carried out the
computer simulations that confirmed
the presence of SO2 in the upper
atmosphere of Venus, says that the
applications of this discovery to the
manipulation of climate are outside his
field of competence. Even so, the article
that this researcher and his team at the
Californian Institute of Technology [Cal
Tech] published in Nature Geoscience,
(31 October 2010), does not exclude this
K View of one face of Venus taken by the Magellan
probe.. © NASA/ Courtesy nasaimages.org
