time was an area exclusively dominated
by men. And when women were
gradually getting a share in the
development of journalism, especially in
central Afghanistan, the black rule of
Taliban gained ground. As a result,
women’s journalistic life in Afghanistan
has no long precedence. 
In the 1980s, a very limited number
of women such as Zakia Kohzad were
active in journalism, while in the 1990s,
under the Taliban’s authoritarian regime,
women journalists were almost entirely
non-existent. A few women such as
Belqais Maqiz and Fatana Ishaq Gailani
nonetheless managed to publish The



Slowly
but surely
There are about 300 women journalists in Afghanistan today, for a population of 25
million. After the repressive 1990s, the new millennium has opened the door for greater
freedom of expression. Threats, the weight of tradition and other obstacles remain, but
despite the arduous journey, Afghan women journalists are moving forward with
determination, says Humaira Habib.
HUMAIRA HABIB 
“I want to keep all the invitation cards I
have received for press conferences for
my daughters and grandchildren to see
in the future and to be proud of me,”
Zakiyah Zaki, journalist and manager of
the Voice of Peace Radio, in Parwan
Province, Central Afghanistan, said to
me when we were both participants in a
conference for journalists in Kabul. She
seemed nervous and was concerned
about anonymous threats she had
recently received. Two weeks later, she
was murdered in her home by gunmen.
It was in June 2007.
After three decades of war and
destruction, Afghanistan is in transition.
Affected by poverty, forced migrations,
and national and international plays of
policy, the country is now experiencing
an unprecedented profusion of media,
in a semi democratic society thriving
with unlimited freedom of expression.
Devoid of any experience of historical
evolution, these media have grown
suddenly, in the wake of political and
commercial propaganda. According to
Adila Kabiri, journalist and Professor of
Journalism at Herat University, women
had no place in journalism in
Afghanistan’s past. In its capacity as a
new science, journalism found a footing
in Afghanistan at the same time as the
country’s Constitution and for a long
Sima and Storey, two Radio
Sahar journalists, preparing
an early morning broadcast in
Heart, northwest Afghanistan. 
© www.valentinamonti.com 
K Herat tribunal. A woman petitioning for divorce is interviewed by Farawia, journalist for Radio Sahar.
© ww.valentinamonti.com 

Afghan Woman (Zan-e Afghan) and
Hope (Rozaneh) in Peshawar in Pakistan
during this period.
A significant achievement of post
Taliban Afghanistan, 2001 onwards, is
the rapid and widespread development
of the media and support for freedom
of expression.  The country now boasts
its tens of radio and television
broadcasting stations, hundreds of
magazines and publications as well as
newspapers and periodicals and its
many media agencies and printing
offices.
Women have had an active presence
in the media and the social arena within
the past decade, reaching a level of
participation unprecedented in
Afghanistan’s history. The country is
now home to more than three hundred
woman journalists and managers of
publications. Women have established
more than ten radio stations and in
2010 some provinces in Afghanistan,
notably Herat and Bamyan, were chosen
to host women’s centres and
foundations.  
Despite the many social and
political restrictions, there are a lot of
Afghan women who have kept up their
activities in journalism. Yet a well-known
Afghan writer and poet, Najiba Ayoubi,
head of the media group Kilid, points
out women journalists should not be
satisfied, given the limited percentage
of them who participate in the
profession.
Examining the main challenges
confronted by women in the media and
the need to raise women’s share in this
area, Ms Ayoubi sees journalist training
institutions and centres for journalism
education as responsible for providing
greater opportunities for women. The
current situation reflects the fact that
Humaira Habib is head of the
Women’s Community Radio Station,
Radio Sahar, in Herat, Western
Afghanistan.
L In a village not far from Herat, a woman listens to the radio while she works.
© www.valentinamonti.com 
women have undergone immense
educational and literacy losses within
three decades of war in Afghanistan,
thus calling for positive discrimination
in their favor. According to Ms Ayoubi,
women have a lower share than men in
leadership roles in the largely male
designed media and fewer
opportunities for work as journalists. In
other words, gender issues should be
brought to the attention of media
officials and professionals in
Afghanistan.
Like all other fields of activity,
journalism is also a forefront of
challenges for Afghan women. Farida
Nekzad, winner of the Canadian
Association of Journalists’ award for
Freedom of Expression in 2007, believes
family restrictions are the main reason
preventing Afghan women from
entering the profession upon
graduation, thus pushing them towards
the teaching profession. Furthermore,
women suffer from a lack of social
relations, not much permitted for
Afghan women, and a basic
discriminatory attitude in their society
that sees women’s activity as less
significant than men’s.
Yet Nekzad believes insecurity in the
country is the first and foremost
problem facing Afghan women
journalists. A large number of women
have lost their lives for their profession
in the last decade, among them Shaima
Rezai and Shakiba Sanga Amaj. Other
journalists like Farida Nekzad and Najia
Khodayar have been severely
threatened, causing them to change
their profession.
The head of the Women’s Rights
Group for Afghan Women, Manizha
Naderi, sees the threats and attacks on
women journalists as a representation
of military violence in the country. She
believes Afghan women in general and
women journalists in particular are
attacked for their attributes, with the
perpetrators seeking to weaken
women’s social position.  
Fawzia Fakhri, founder of the Centre
for Women Journalists in Herat,
enumerates important factors for the
growth of journalism among Afghan
women, such as increasing the share of
women journalists participating in
international gatherings and adding
value to their profession at country
level. The more Afghan women enter
journalism, she believes, the more their
future will improve; better opportunities
and conditions must therefore be
provided for them.
Because Afghanistan is moving from
a traditional society towards a modern
society, everything has undergone
sudden, unprecedented growth and all
is imported from outside. In this
context, Afghan women journalists
believe patience is required to build a
better future and time is the remedy for
their security issues.  
Afghan women call for the support
of the international community to
resolve their security problems and
other challenges. They see international
support as an effective step towards
future development of their activities,
making it possible to eliminate threats
and spare women journalists the cruel
fate of Zakiyah Zaki. ■

Photographs illustrating this article are taken from
“Girls on the air”, a documentary filmed by Valentina
Monti.
The Courier 3 [Eng] [F].:Layout 1  6/5/11  09:56  Page 35
