The plurality of enlightened opinions 
is a prerequisite of the democratic 
development of our societies. The quality 
of the information disseminated by the 
media – traditional or new – is decisive 
when it comes to shaping public opinion. 
This is why UNESCO puts special emphasis 
on education about media and information, 
which it considers a fundamental skill for 
citizens in the twenty-first century.
Freedom of expression and the free 
movement of ideas by words and images 
are among the constitutive principles 
of UNESCO and at the core of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
UNESCO supports the work of dedicated 
journalists and activists who defend 
fundamental freedoms, like the journalist 
Dawit Isaak, winner of the 2017 UNESCO/
Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize, 
whose story appears in this issue 
of the UNESCO Courier. 
Over the last decade, more than 800 
journalists have been victims of crimes 
aimed at muzzling freedom of expression. 
Only one murder out of ten ended with a 
conviction. This impunity is unacceptable 
and further fuels the spiral of violence in the 
future. This is why UNESCO is committed to 
putting an end to these crimes against the 
press, on all continents, as an indispensable 
condition for peaceful societies that are all 
the more robust for being better informed. 
In this “post-truth” era, the role of UNESCO 
is more important than ever, and this issue 
of the Courier is a wonderful opportunity 
to renew our founding commitment to 
support information and communication 
to build peace in the minds of men 
and women.
Irina Bokova 
Director-General of UNESCO
CourierT HE  UNE SCO
Irina Bokova, 
Director-General of UNESCO. 
© Yulian Donov
Each time a new media appears, it triggers 
a revolution – print, radio, television, 
the internet, have all changed the face of 
societies, the ways we get information, 
how we live and organize ourselves. 
Each time a new media appears, voices 
rise to assert that it will kill off the one that 
preceded it – that radio will kill off print 
media, that television will kill off radio, that 
digital media will kill off all the others. Yet, 
today’s media landscape also highlights 
examples of complementarity, of emulation 
and interaction between the various means 
of communication and information, where 
they amplify and respond to one another. 
Never before have we communicated so 
much, and never on such a large scale. 
The new technologies have opened up 
new pathways, enabling citizens across the 
world to gain access to more diverse and 
more numerous sources of information, and 
to play a new role in the production of this 
information − to become the producers of 
content themselves. These new media are 
also creating new barriers and raising new 
challenges in terms of regulation and ethics. 
Where does information come from? How 
is it created? Who guarantees its quality? 
How do we distinguish between true 
and false in this web, woven by billions 
of pieces of information coming from 
all sides? In the incredible tangle of the 
media, the traditional roles of producer, 
broadcaster and consumer have changed. 
The production of fake news and the risk 
of confining audiences in “filter bubbles” 
generated by algorithms, raises new 
questions about freedom of expression 
and cultural diversity.
Editorial
