A reference work
for our times
by Nahid Afrose Kabir
We live at a time when Muslims and 
their religion, Islam, are misunderstood 
in many parts of the world. Muslims 
are generally perceived in the West as 
a homogeneous, monolithic group of 
people who are violent and oppress 
their women. In some Asian countries, 
where Muslims and non-Muslims have 
shared the same language and culture 
for centuries, Muslims are suddenly 
viewed as “different”.
Since the September 11, 2001 Twin 
Towers attacks in the United States, 
the rhetoric of “Us” against “Them” has 
been used to exclude Muslims from 
mainstream society. Some politicians 
have been calling for a ban or an end to 
all Muslim immigration. 
It is important to acknowledge that a 
tiny minority of Muslims have resorted 
to terrorism. But it is equally important 
to note that Muslims are as much, if not 
more, the victims of terrorism as are 
non-Muslims.
Seeking to dispel some of the 
misconceptions surrounding Muslims 
today, the UNESCO six-volume v, 
The Different Aspects of Islamic 
Culture (1977 to 2016) is timely and 
informative. It informs readers about 
Islam, from its revelation to the beliefs 
and practices of Muslims. The book 
describes the diversity in Islam through 
its different schools of thought.
Launched in 1977, in the wake of a 
monumental work on general and 
regional histories, this collective work was 
completed in November 2016, with the 
publications of Volumes I and VI, which 
constitute an important contribution to 
the current debate on Islam.
The books explain the puritanical 
notions that have been generated from 
offshoots of Islam, and also describe 
how, over several centuries, many 
Muslim thinkers have rejected narrow, 
dogmatic interpretations of the Koran, 
and encouraged the use of reason.
On the question of women, the book 
offers interesting insights, notably on 
the advantaged status of women during 
the Abbasid and Ayyubid periods from 
the eighth to the thirteenth centuries. It 
also discusses the Islamic feminists from 
the early twentieth century, who had 
their voices heard in the Arab world. 
The book also reflects on the 
contribution of Islamic civilizations 
in the fields of science, medicine, 
mathematics and astronomy. 


The Different Aspects of Islamic Culture, Volumes 1—6,
Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 1977—2016

Interior of Prophet's Mosque (al-Masjid al-Nabawi), Medina, Saudi Arabia.
© Enciktat/Shutterstock



To quote just one example, Muslims 
invented algebra! The collection 
reminds readers of the glory of the 
Muslim Sultanate and how its legacy 
is still remembered through its art and 
architecture — for example, the Taj Mahal 
in India. It also discusses how the East, 
including the Islamic countries, were, 
in some periods of history, far more 
advanced than the (Christian) West, 
due to the trade of silk and spices 
through the Silk Route. However, as 
Muslim countries in Asia and Africa 
began to flourish through trade and 
commerce, the West commenced its 
territorial expansion and introduced 
its colonial system.
Reverting to the present, the book 
provides a balanced debate by 
highlighting tensions within and 
among Muslim countries — for 
example, the Iranian Revolution, the 
Iran-Iraq War, the rise of the Taliban, 
the Kashmir conflict, and the dynamics 
between secular and Islamic states. 
These conflicts are exacerbated by 
corruption, poor health services, 
economic inequality and illiteracy.
The question of minority Muslims in 
the world today — a subject which I 
have written about in the book — is 
particularly important. It is precisely 
these Muslims and their communities, 
and Muslim immigrants, who suffer 
the marginalization, Islamophobia and 
discrimination, as I emphasized at the 
beginning of this article. 
The UNESCO collection also examines 
some positive aspects of the 
relationships between Muslims and 
non-Muslims, and offers suggestions to 
help develop a better understanding 
between them.
The author of a chapter on minority 
Muslims in the world today, 
Nahid Afroz Kabir is a Muslim 
woman, originally from Bangladesh. 
She is now an Australian citizen, and 
a US Permanent Resident. Author 
of “Muslim Minorities in the World 
Today”, published in The Different 
Aspects of Islamic Culture, 2016, 
Kabir is a visiting researcher at the 
Prince Alwaleed bin Talal Center for 
Muslim-Christian Understanding at 
Georgetown University, Washington 
DC, USA. Kabir’s books include: 
Muslims in Australia: Immigration, 
Race Relations and Cultural History 
(2005); Young British Muslims: Identity, 
Culture, Politics and the Media (2010); 
Young American Muslims: Dynamics of 
Identity (2013); and Muslim Americans: 
Debating the Notions of American and 
Un-American (2017). 
