I am allergic to the idea of investigative 
journalism being termed a “mission” or 
“calling”. It is an individual choice born 
out of need, combined with a set of 
skills and a particular character, which 
is persistent, sometimes in the face 
of abuse. My colleague, Inga Spriņģe, 
once explained that she does it for 
her grandmother, who was never 
in a position to confront the Soviet 
authorities with tough questions!
Spriņģe’s resolve, and mine, to keep 
questioning the powers that be, was 
tested when Diena – the newspaper 
we worked for − was sold by its 
publisher, Bonnier [the Swedish media 
conglomerate], to local oligarchs 
who had tried to silence it for years. 
This happened in the midst of a deep 
economic crisis, and declining sales and 
readership for the paper, which took 
the web seriously way too late.
Taking the plunge
A group of us who had worked for Diena 
– considered the best newspaper in the 
Baltics − never gave up on the idea that 
in a democracy, investigative journalism 
is fundamentally necessary to hold those 
in power accountable. This is equally 
true in countries with authoritarian 
regimes, where the personal costs for 
the journalists involved is even higher. 

Investigative 
journalism:
against the odds
by Sanita Jemberga
Investigative journalism is one of the pillars of a well-functioning 
democracy. But its future cannot be guaranteed without financial 
autonomy. The case of Re: Baltica, a centre for investigative 
journalism in Latvia, is a good case in point. 

A drawing from the collection of 
Cartooning for Peace, an international 
network of socially-engaged editorial 
cartoonists, supported by UNESCO.

Without investigative writing, we would 
have to subsist on a diet of daily news, 
paid government content and celebrity 
gossip. Journalism would then work not 
as a watchdog, but as a lapdog for those 
in power. 
To prepare ourselves for the change, 
Spriņģe spent a year in the United 
States, studying non-profit models for 
investigative journalism. She returned to 
Latvia to establish the Baltic Center for 
Investigative Journalism, Re:Baltica, in 
2011. Run by a co-operative of journalists, 
the centre provides the results of its 
investigations to the mainstream media, 
free of charge. 
The idea was relatively new in Europe, 
but, by 2012, there were already more 
than a hundred non-profit centres for 
investigative journalism in over fifty 
countries. Everyone predicted Re:Baltica 
would be dead in a year, but they have 
been proved wrong. We celebrate 
our sixth anniversary in August 2017. 
There are clear reasons why we have 
survived and thrived.
The first is the ability to put in a lot 
of hard work and take the plunge. 
We realized early on that if our incomes 
depended solely on international donors 
(which, for a small language and a 
relatively poor media market is almost 
the only funding available), we would 
not last long. Sixty per cent of our budget 
comes from grants, and the rest from our 
personal incomes, earned from teaching, 
consulting, researching and writing 
scripts for documentaries. We also get 
donations from our readers and private 
donors. We are still never certain how 
we will survive beyond a year. 
Exposing more 
than corruption 
Finding the right partners is key. We are 
also frugal with costs – we choose not 
to spend a lot on our website or office 
space. Re:Baltica staff consist of two core 
editorial people, a graphic designer and 
an accountant, and then we hire people 
according to the needs of a particular 
story – up to twenty or thirty journalists 
and translators a year.  
While our work is available for free to 
all media outlets who want to publish 
it, we have a dedicated set of partners 
in television, radio, print and online 
with whom we co-operate closely. 
As these media outlets do not compete 
directly, the message is multiplied: 
and so is the impact.
Investigative journalism is not just about 
exposing corruption. We did participate 
in the Panama Papers investigation – 
the giant leak of more than 11.5 million 
financial and legal documents, which 
exposed the names of politicians, 
criminals and the rogue industry around 
the globe, and where they hid their 
cash. Spearheaded by the International 
Consortium of Investigative Journalists 
(ICIJ), the colossal global project made 
headlines worldwide, won a Pulitzer Prize, 
and was the basis for new laws being 
passed in some countries. 

Ghanaian investigative journalist, 
Anas Aremeyaw Anas, known for 
his reports on human rights violations 
and corruption, preserves his anonymity 
by concealing his face whenever 
he appears in public.

But much of our work focuses on social 
inequalities in Latvia, which is the 
biggest threat to the country in the 
long term. We cover a range of social 
problems − from the shortcomings of our 
education system, to the poor salaries 
paid to staff by large supermarket chains. 
The work is not always glamorous − our 
colleagues went undercover to work in 
a fish factory to expose the conditions 
of workers there. 
Our latest exposé was about a Latvian 
financier who featured in the Panama 
Papers and was connected with the 
French elections in 2017. We are 
also working on a series of articles 
to expose fake news and its origins 
on the Baltic internet.
No strings attached
I am not very optimistic about the 
future of investigative journalism. But 
I am convinced that the rise to power of 
authoritarian regimes will make journalism 
great again: by exposing a need to 
separate the truth from “alternative facts” 
(or in other words, lies), and clickbaits from 
real reporting. Non-profit organizations 
have proven to be a possible alternative 
to mainstream media at a time when 
investigative journalism is disappearing 
from newsrooms. 
But many of these non-profit ventures 
will die as institutional donors lose 
interest and philanthropy is scarce, 
especially in countries which need 
investigative reporting the most. 
Investigative journalism must be 
recognized as a public good and assigned 
funding, there is very limited hope for it. 
International organizations, which 
are keen to train journalists and fund 
conferences and campaigns, must devise 
mechanisms to publicly, openly and 
competitively fund the investigative 
content as a public good, with no 
strings attached. That is the only way 
investigative journalism will survive. 
Sanita Jemberga is a Latvian 
investigative journalist who has worked 
in print and television since 1996. 
She is executive director and editor 
at the non-profit Baltic Center for 
Investigative Journalism, Re:Baltica, and 
teaches media literacy at the Stockholm 
School of Economics in Riga. 

A drawing from the collection of 
Cartooning for Peace, an international 
network of socially-engaged editorial 
cartoonists, supported by UNESCO.
