The number of armed conflicts has 
been escalating since the 1980s − first in 
Central Asia (Afghanistan), then in parts of 
the Middle  East (Iraq and Syria) and West 
Africa (Mali). These have led to an increase in 
the destruction of historic sites by terrorist 
groups and an explosion in the trafficking 
of cultural artefacts. The international 
community has responded actively to 
the destruction wreaked by ISIS, with a much 
wider range of instruments at its disposal 
− making it possible to enhance its protection 
of the cultural memory of humanity.
In 2017, the international community 
demonstrated that it was united in its political 
determination to protect cultural heritage. 
Resolution 2347 of the UN Security Council 
formally recognizes that the defence of 
cultural heritage is imperative for security.
It took a long time before the seeds of the idea 
of immunity for cultural property in times of 
war grew into a historic decision. This marks 
a new global consciousness of the role that 
culture plays in maintaining security.
The process began at the end of 
the nineteenth century, when fifteen 
European states met in Brussels (Belgium), 
on 27 July 1874, to examine the draft 
international agreement concerning 
the Laws and Customs of War. A month 
later, Article 8 of the Brussels Declaration 
stipulated that, in times of war, “All seizure 
or destruction of, or wilful damage to 
[…] historic monuments, works of art 
and science should be made the subject 
of legal proceedings by the competent 
authorities.”
Twenty-five years later, in 1899, 
on the initiative of Tsar Nicholas II of 
Russia, an international peace conference 
was held in the Netherlands, with the aim 
of revising the Declaration (which was 
never ratified) and adopting a Convention 
with Respect to the Laws and Customs 
of War on Land. 
by Catherine Fiankan-Bokonga 
On 24 March 2017, the United 
Nations Security Council 
unanimously adopted Resolution 
2347, relating to the protection 
of cultural heritage. This was 
an unprecedented victory! It has 
taken nearly a century and a half 
for the idea to mature. Then, 
over the past few years, progress 
was suddenly made. And 
a growing awareness of the role 
that cultural heritage can play 
in fostering security was born. 
Delegates at the International Peace 
Conference pose on the steps of 
the Huis ten Bosch palace in The Hague 
(Netherlands) on 18 May 1899. 

heritage

A historic 
resolution 
to protect cultural heritage

Also known as the Hague Convention of 
1899, it considerably advanced international 
law and established the principle of the 
immunity of cultural property. According to 
Article 27 of the Convention (revised 
during the Second Hague Convention 
on 18 October 1907), “In sieges and 
bombardments all necessary steps must 
be taken to spare, as far as possible, 
buildings dedicated to religion, art, science, 
or charitable purposes, historic monuments, 
hospitals […], provided they are not being 
used at the time for military purposes. 
It is the duty of the besieged to indicate 
the presence of such buildings or places by 
distinctive and visible signs, which shall be 
notified to the enemy beforehand.” 
Three decades later, in 1935, the 
preamble of the Treaty on the Protection 
of Artistic and Scientific Institutions 
− a pan-American initiative also known as 
the Roerich Pact − formulated the idea that 
cultural property, which “form the cultural 
treasure of peoples” must “be respected and 
protected in time of war and in peace”.
Landmark conventions 
and decrees
A decisive step forward was taken 
after the Second World War. In 1948, 
the Netherlands proposed a new 
draft international text to UNESCO on 
the protection of cultural property in 
times of armed conflict. The Organization 
began the process of drafting a new 
international convention, which was 
adopted at The Hague in 1954. 
Safeguard and respect are the 
watchwords of the Hague Convention 
for the Protection of Cultural Property in 
the Event of Armed Conflict and its two 
Protocols (1954 and 1999). “Damage to 
cultural property belonging to any people 
whatsoever” is internationally recognized 
as “damage to the cultural heritage of all 
mankind”. The Convention also ensures 
“the granting of special protection” to 
“a limited number of refuges intended 
to shelter movable cultural property 
in the event of armed conflict, of centres 
containing monuments and other 
immovable cultural property of very great 
importance”. 
That same year, in 1954, Egypt decided 
to build the Aswan Dam, which would 
flood the Upper Nile Valley and a large 
number of 3000-year-old monuments 
of what was once Nubia. At the request 
of Egypt and Sudan, UNESCO launched 
an international campaign to safeguard 
these monuments – one of the most 
spectacular in the history of mankind, 
and which would last two decades, 
from 1960 to 1980. The Nubia Campaign 
was the starting point for the Convention 
concerning the Protection of the 
World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 
known as the 1972 Convention, 
and the establishment of the World 
Heritage List. This text provides for the 
inscription on the List of World Heritage 
in Danger of properties threatened with 
grave danger, including armed conflicts, 
which are imminent or have recently 
broken out.  
The spectacular Nubia Campaign,  
co-ordinated by UNESCO (1960 - 1980), 
was the inspiration for the idea of 
World Cultural Heritage. 

It is essentially because of these texts 
and co-operation with UNESCO that 
the UN International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was 
able to sentence former Yugoslav naval 
officer, Miodrag Jokić, to seven years 
of imprisonment in 2004. This was 
the first-ever conviction for the deliberate 
destruction of cultural heritage. 
Under Jokić’s command, hundreds of 
mortars were fired, between the beginning 
of October and the end of December 1991, 
on the old town of Dubrovnik, which was 
inscribed the same year on the List of 
World Heritage in Danger.
Largely as a result of these conflicts, 
UNESCO and several States Parties 
re-examined the 1954 Convention and 
drafted the Second Protocol, adopted 
in 1999. This introduced a new system 
of heightened protection for cultural 
properties of very great importance, 
which should also be protected 
by adequate national legislation; with 
the capacity to punish serious violations 
of the Convention with appropriate 
sentences. Serious violations include 
theft, pillage, attacks or acts of vandalism 
against cultural property, especially those 
with heightened protection. 
More recently, in 2016, the International 
Criminal Court (ICC) found the Malian 
jihadist, Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, 
guilty of war crimes for the destruction 
in 2012 of ten religious sites in Timbuktu, 
while the city was under the control of 
Ansar Dine, a group suspected to have 
ties to al Qaeda. He was sentenced 
to nine years’ imprisonment. This was 
a historic judgement, as the destruction 
of cultural heritage had never before been 
considered a war crime (see p. 18). 
“Immediately after the destruction in 
2012, UNESCO alerted the international 
community and seized the International 
Criminal Court to ensure such crimes 
do not go unpunished,” explained 
Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO. 
The Organization undertook a series 
of measures, ranging from providing 
the armed forces with topographical 
details, to the reconstruction of the 
mausoleums. For the first time in history, 
safeguarding the cultural heritage of 
a country was written into the mandate of 
a United Nations Mission (Resolution 2100). 
MINUSMA, the UN peacekeeping mission 
in Mali, was entrusted with “protecting 
from attack the cultural and historical sites 
in Mali, in collaboration with UNESCO”.

Before and after photographs of 
the Temple of Bel, one of the most 
iconic monuments in Palmyra (Syria), 
destroyed by ISIS in August 2015.

For the first time in history, a UN 
resolution covers the full range of 
threats to cultural heritage, without any 
geographical limitations and regardless 
of whether the perpetrators of the crimes 
are terrorist groups already on UN lists or 
belong to other armed groups. 
Born in Geneva (Switzerland) to 
a father from the Democratic Republic 
of Congo and a Belgian mother, 
Catherine Fiankan‑Bokonga is chief 
editor of the Swiss publication, Klvin Mag, 
and a television journalist for France 24, 
based in Geneva. 
The Italian carabinieri save a painting 
from the parish church of Santa Maria 
Assunto in the village of Cossito (Italy), 
which was destroyed by a violent 
earthquake in August 2016.  
That same year, an emergency task force 
was set up under the aegis of UNESCO.

2015, a turning point
The year 2015 marked a real turning 
point in the attitude of the international 
community to cultural heritage. 
In February that year, with the backing 
of UNESCO, some fifty countries adopted 
UN Security Council Resolution 2199 
(see p. 12), prohibiting trade in cultural 
property coming from Iraq and Syria. 
“This resolution acknowledges that 
cultural heritage stands on the frontline 
of conflicts today, and it should be placed 
at the frontline of security and political 
response to the crisis,” said Irina Bokova, 
at the time.
A month later in Baghdad (Iraq), 
convinced of the effectiveness of “soft 
power”, she launched Unite4Heritage, 
a global campaign on social media, 
uniting young people in the celebration 
and safeguarding of cultural heritage 
around the world. 
On 1 September 2015, the United Nations 
Institute for Training and Research 
(UNITAR) published satellite photos 
showing that ISIS jihadists had destroyed 
the Temple of Bel in Palmyra. The main 
building of this World Heritage site in 
Syria no longer exists! Soon after, Italy 
proposed the idea of creating the “Blue 
Helmets for Culture” to the UN General 
Assembly. In February 2016, Italy signed 
an agreement with UNESCO to create 
the world’s first emergency task force for 
culture, composed of civilian experts and 
the Italian carabinieri. 
The United Arab Emirates, together with 
France, have since held an international 
conference on protecting cultural 
heritage in times of armed conflicts, 
under the auspices of UNESCO. 
In December 2016, representatives from 
over forty countries met in Abu Dhabi to 
reaffirm their “common determination 
to safeguard the endangered cultural 
heritage of all peoples, against its 
destruction and illicit trafficking” and to 
recall the successive conventions since 
1899 that “require us to protect human 
life, as well as cultural property in times 
of armed conflict”.
For Irina Bokova, “a new cultural 
landscape” is being built, and “a new 
global awareness” is emerging, with 
the birth of “a new approach to 
protect culture for peace and security”. 
Her convictions were quickly confirmed 
by the unanimous adoption of Resolution 
2347 of the UN Security Council on 
24 March 2017.
This text includes two of the main 
operational outcomes of the 
international conference in Abu Dhabi 
− the creation of an international fund 
and the organization of a network of safe 
havens for endangered cultural property. 
It also highlights the links between the 
trafficking of cultural property and the 
financing of terrorist groups, and between 
terrorism and organized crime. 
