by Marie Angélique Ingabire 
Using theatre as a catalyst for 
dialogue, Global Arts Corps 
encourages people from 
conflict zones to explore their 
painful pasts, and help them 
to build a future. A group of 
young Cambodians travel to 
a festival in Kigali to connect 
with Rwandan and Congolese 
audiences who have lived 
through similar traumatic 
experiences. Together, they 
help each other heal, through 
a shared understanding, 
tolerance and empathy.
“Through the rehearsal process, actors 
manage to hear the stories of those 
they have learned to fear, disdain, 
and hate and then, together, create 
a single, agreed upon, fair story of their 
multiple truths,” Michael Lessac, 
co-founder and Artistic Director of GAC, 
explains. 
Lessac, a well-known American theatre 
and film personality, is the creator 
and director of the award-winning 
international theatre piece, Truth in 
Translation, about the story of the 
South African Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission. Co-produced with South 
Africa’s Market Theatre, the project 
traveled to twenty-six cities in eleven 
countries around the world, and led 
to his co-founding of the Global Arts 
Corps in 2009, along with his wife, 
Jacqueline Bertrand. 
Global Arts Corps, which has taken 
its work from Rwanda to Kosovo, 
and Cambodia to Northern Ireland, 
hopes audience members from vastly 
different backgrounds can find a piece 
of themselves in the experiences 
of other people. 
In July 2016, nineteen young Cambodian 
performers traveled to Rwanda to 
participate in the Ubumuntu Arts Festival. 
The world premiere of their production, 
See You Yesterday, a unique mix of theatre, 
dance and circus, was performed in an 
amphitheatre on the grounds of the Kigali 
Genocide Memorial. The Cambodians 
– second-generation survivors of 
the Khmer Rouge genocide (1975 to 1979) 
– were afforded the rare chance to 
connect with an audience who were also 
survivors, of the genocide in Rwanda. 
The arts festival brought together 
companies from eighteen different 
countries, all of which had emerged 
from violent conflicts. In a country like 
Rwanda, where a million lives were lost 
in the genocide of 1994, the concept 
of humanity has been so fragile that the 
restoration of hope requires serious work. 
The Cambodian group was performing 
under the banner of the Global Arts 
Corps (GAC), an international community 
of professional artists which uses the 
transformative power of the theatre to 
bring together people from different 
post-conflict areas.



Breaking 
the cycle of vengeance 
Young people from Cambodia and the 
Congo meet after a performance of 
See You Yesterday at the refugee camp 
in Kigeme, Rwanda.

The Cambodian youth, some of 
them street children, were trained 
in acrobatics by the Phare Ponleu 
Selpak, an association created in 1992 
in Battambang city. Using their 
world-class circus skills, the association’s 
founders work to help children in their 
communities to overcome the problems 
of the dark past of their parents.
Empathy helps healing
The most significant outcome of bringing 
people from two different genocide 
backgrounds together was that both 
nationalities noticed that they were not 
alone, and had nothing to be ashamed 
of. A young boy said he remembered 
being forced to beat a prisoner when 
he was still in the Congo, as was enacted 
in the performance. Other touching 
testimonials emerged from the crowd.
They have taken their work to seventeen 
countries on four continents so far, 
reaching over 100,000 audience members 
and facilitating reconciliation workshops for 
over 15,000 people in post-conflict zones. 
Partnering with non-governmental 
organizations and training local activists, 
educators and artists, GAC works 
to ensure that the work they begin 
is carried on when they leave. Everything 
– from the rehearsals of each production, 
to the dialogues they spark – is filmed. 
The idea is to build a vast educational 
archive to supplement a group of theatre 
artists trained to collaborate with people 
emerging out of violent conflicts. 
Using professional theatre to support 
reconciliation initiatives was “not an 
easy process initially,” Lessac recalls. 
“Young people did not want to talk about 
the past, so they used their extraordinary 
physical skills to creatively move back to 
the past, to try to understand what their 
elders went through during the genocide.” 
After the festival, the Cambodian 
cast and crew traveled to southern 
Rwanda, to perform at the Kigeme 
refugee camp there. The camp is home 
to 20,000 refugees, displaced from 
the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
ravaged by two decades of civil war 
and famine. Using a makeshift stage 
in a vast open field, the Cambodians 
performed on three consecutive days 
– each time to swelling audiences. 
Besides, GAC facilitated workshops for 
young refugees after the performances.
A curious Cambodian schoolboy 
watching the rehearsal of See You Yesterday, 
peering over Michael Lessac, Artistic Director 
of Global Arts Corps. 

Equally poignant was the reaction 
of Khuon Det, a co-founder of 
the Cambodian circus, who now works 
with the GAC. Growing up in a refugee 
camp on the Thai border after the 
collapse of the Khmer Rouge regime, 
he remembered his own experience as a 
child, as he saw the Congolese children 
rush to welcome the Cambodian group. 
“We were so happy to see outsiders…
it makes my heart full,” he said. 
“Talking about our past, however dark 
it may be, is a way to heal our wounds. 
It is also the best method to help future 
generations learn from past errors to 
prevent this from happening again,” 
says Innocent Munyeshuri, a young 
Rwandan actor who narrated the 
Cambodian show in Kinyarwanda, a local 
language also spoken by the Congolese.
Through an exploration of different 
identities, the GAC hopes to generate 
empathy among its actors. “You should 
be able to empathize through someone 
else’s point of view as well as your own, 
otherwise you do not know where you 
come from, you don’t understand others,” 
Lessac states.
Actors who grew up in post-conflict 
societies are the first to benefit 
from GAC’s work. Arben Bajraktaraj, 
an Albanian actor and one of GAC’s 
trainers, explains how empathy helps 
actors feel an inner security: “We see 
empathy as a discovery, the most 
important thing in our creation process. 
You must put your judgements aside to 
discover the real image, and it will change 
the way you see the world. For that, 
you must release yourself completely.”
Part circus, part theatre
The GAC’s future projects include bringing 
together people with similar dark pasts 
to participate in one huge production, 
which is part circus, part theatre. 
The actors will go back in time to discover 
where their prejudices and cultural anger 
come from and, out of that, create a story 
that includes truths from all the sides. 
This would create a solid basis 
for reconciliation, Lessac explains.
The project hopes to involve participants 
from the growing refugee communities 
in Germany and France. In Colombia, 
it will include former rebels who are 
being reintegrated into society after 
many years in the jungle. Young actors 
and musicians from Flint, Michigan 
(United States), will also participate. 
In the Middle East and Argentina, the 
work of women’s movements, past and 
present − dealing with peace and identity 
– will be highlighted. 
“We don’t imagine that we can change 
the world directly but, by working 
with youth and creating ways for them 
to understand their own post-conflict 
situations through rehearsal, we can 
begin to build pathways for insightful 
communication and connection 
between young people from different 
cultures and conflicts around the world. 
Hopefully, this can help to break the 
revenge cycle that continues to plague us 
today,” concludes Lessac.
Marie Angélique Ingabire is a Rwandan 
journalist based in Paris. She has 
worked for Rwanda’s public television, 
presenting, hosting and producing 
political and educational programmes. 
She also conducts workshops on the 
freedom of expression in French schools.
Scene from the play Truth in Translation, 
which tells the story of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
in South Africa.
