Ethnic conflict and displacement 
robbed my father’s sister of opportunity. 
The family fled from Turkey to Greece in 
1922, her parents died, and she never 
went to school. She learned the reading 
basics in her 40s, from her daughter who 
was a teacher. She spent fifty years in a 
big city, surrounded by print. But when 
I tested her at age 97, I found out that 
she could only read capital letters and 
very hesitantly. At best, she puzzled out 
bus labels.
Very different was the performance of 
Sofia, who took care of me. Uprooted 
from Turkey in 1922, she attended first 
grade before becoming a homeless 
orphan. When I was learning to read, she 
was the one who helped me. She read 
our textbooks haltingly, and we used 
to laugh. But she could process entire 
sentences, so she kept practising, and 
improved. In the last years of her life, 
she would put on her reading glasses, 
open the newspaper, and read the news 
to my mother. 
Every September 8, on International 
Literacy Day, my memory goes to the 
illiterate women of my youth. Poverty 
and ethnic conflict in my native Greece 
were severe several decades ago, but 
they presented the same educational 
problems as today.
In the 1930s, when rural girls rarely 
went to school, two aunts in Athens 
hired a young woman. They were 
teachers and diligently taught her to 
read in the relatively consistent Greek 
orthography. Maria learned letters but 
never progressed beyond single words. 
Eventually she gave up. She watched 
over children who studied before her, 
but still died illiterate in her 90s. 



Early literacy
the key to fluency 
by Helen Abadzi
At a time when large-scale refugee displacements have created huge 
disruptions in the literacy of tens of thousands of children, education 
specialist Helen Abadzi – whose work has helped raise early-grade 
reading fluency to a high-level international priority − strongly 
advocates that countries and institutions “vaccinate” young children 
with literacy at an early age, and definitely before the age of eighteen. 
This three-dimensional painting reproduces 
a drawing by 11-year-old Walaa, evoking 
the memory of the time when her school 
was bombed in her home town in Syria. 
It was staged by her young friends at a 
refugee camp in the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon. 
The children are attending a school run by 
Save The Children, where they participate 
in educational activities, including reading.

Adult dyslexia
Decades later, as an education specialist 
at the World Bank, I appraised and 
evaluated adult literacy projects. 
Governments and NGOs tried hard to 
teach adults in the 1980s and 1990s, but 
the cases reminded me of my childhood 
images. In Bangladesh, learners decoded 
letters laboriously, even after a year of 
practice. In Burkina Faso, adults who 
had completed courses read haltingly, 
and even had trouble reading their own 
handwriting. By contrast, little-educated 
people who had learned in childhood, 
read fluently, like Sofia. The difference 
was striking.
It is not just unschooled adults who 
read laboriously. Educated foreigners 
learning languages that have unknown 
scripts experience the same difficulties. 
“Western” academics and aid workers 
who spend decades in Ethiopia or 
Bangladesh may speak the languages of 
those countries fluently, but perpetually 
read like mid-first graders. They report 
seeing a jumble of letters that must be 
decoded one by one. Reading is thus 
too tedious, and many avoid it.
These events point to a striking 
phenomenon that could be called ‘adult 
neo-literate dyslexia’. It seems to become 
significant by age 19 and probably 
affects all of us.  
University students who must learn 
different scripts past the age of 18 
typically read slowly, and for decades 
have difficulty scanning text. Several 
cognitive and neuroscientific studies 
show long-lasting reading difficulties 
for adults. Adult dyslexia may partly 
account for the very poor adult literacy 
programme outcomes worldwide. But it 
has gone unnoticed. Educators typically 
attribute these failures to social issues, 
learner motivation, or organizational 
problems. These are certainly important, 
but the results among those who persist 
are disappointing. And since this strange 
dyslexia has remained invisible, little 
direct research has gone into it.
But what is effortless reading and why 
does it matter? This competency seems 
like a commonplace rite of passage 
in childhood, but it requires specific 
changes in the brain. 
Children may be 
‘vaccinated’ with 
literacy 
Reading originates as a perceptual 
learning function; in the first few 
milliseconds, it is disconnected from 
meaning. With practice, the letter 
shapes are grouped and processed 
in the brain simultaneously. The brain 
does this most efficiently if the symbols 
are taught one by one, with pattern 
analogies. Practice combines small 
units into larger ones. Some scripts and 
spelling systems take longer than others 
to learn. But in all cultures, from France 
to China, people use the same brain 
structures to read.

Initially, learners decode single letters 
and exert conscious effort. After dozens 
of practice hours, processing moves to 
a part of the brain that recognizes words 
as if they were faces. Then multiple 
letters are decoded at one glance, like 
facial features. Simultaneously, reading 
becomes effortless, automatic. We cannot 
stop ourselves from reading, just as we 
cannot stop the recognition of people 
we know. This may happen at forty-five 
to sixty words per minute.
Thanks to perceptual learning, humans 
can learn to recognize footprints, musical 
notation, numbers, mathematical equations, 
astronomical constellations, or weather 
prediction signs. And once this visual 
function is learned and practised repeatedly, 
it is rarely forgotten. Thus children may be 
‘vaccinated’ with literacy.
Strangely, we do not need to know a 
language in order to read it fluently, nor 
do we need to be able to write the letters! 
Millions of children worldwide learn to read, 
for religious purposes, texts in unknown 
languages that differ from a country’s official 
scripts. It greatly helps to learn a consistent 
spelling system, like Spanish or Hindi rather 
than an inconsistent one, like English or 
Khmer. But to understand a text, we must be 
fluent. The limitations of short-term memory 
demand speed. Educated adults may read 
250 to 350 words per minute.
Children who drop out of school after 
attaining automaticity, may read printed 
signs in the environment and thus get 
sufficient practice to maintain the skill 
and improve it. 
This was the case of Sofia, my childhood 
care-taker. But if they drop out before 
attaining fluency, letter-by-letter decoding 
is too tedious. Like Maria and my father’s 
sister, they may pass by store signs and street 
names, but are not able to read them.
Unfortunately, the ability of children to 
automatize a large set of symbols has a 
deadline. Certain neural circuits involved 
in perception have sensitive periods and 
gradually slow down during adolescence. 
If the process to automatize reading is 
interrupted for years, precious time may be 
lost that cannot be regained. 
80 year-old Parachiva reads 
by candlelight at her home in a remote 
village in Bucovina, Romania.

Fluency by age 18 
The large-scale refugee displacements 
of the twenty-first century have created 
the perfect illiteracy storm. The schooling 
of many children has been interrupted 
at critical moments. Moving from Syria 
to Greece and to Germany, they may 
never automatize the perceptually 
challenging Arabic script. For some, 
the disruption may be permanent. And 
displacement is not the only threat to 
childhood literacy. Low-income countries 
have expanded schooling with little 
knowledge of how to teach the poor, and 
the results have created a generation of 
schooled illiterates. The problems are 
compounded by the use of English and 
French that have complex spelling. Thus, 
large numbers of African students can at 
best decipher only a few letters or words 
in those languages. Some are known to 
attend adult literacy classes as adults, 
but it may be too late for automaticity, 
according to the World Bank.
These neurological realities have 
implications for the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) as well. 
According to SDG 4.6, governments 
should ensure that all youth and a 
substantial proportion of adults, both 
men and women, achieve literacy and 
numeracy by 2030. To facilitate the 
learning process and the teachers’ 
workload, the neurocognitive research 
should be put to use. 
To activate the perceptual learning 
function, complex teaching activities 
are unnecessary. Teachers should teach 
letter-by-letter phonics and pattern 
analogies, and give lots of practice 
in class, with feedback. Practice links 
small units into larger ones, words 
and sentences.  
Thick or abundant books are 
indispensable for the ‘face’-recognition 
competency to develop. They should 
use letters that are large and spaced to 
accommodate the brain’s visual demands. 
Writing supports reading, and vocabulary 
must be learned in order to make sense 
of texts. Because the reading process is 
universal, forty-five to sixty words could 
be a rough benchmark of automaticity 
in almost all languages and scripts. 
To learn from texts and enjoy reading, 
this speed should be attained by the end 
of second grade. 
Donors and governments receive a 
lot of confusing advice about reading. 
Traditional letter-by-letter methods 
that better conformed to brain 
processes have been replaced by 
whole language activities that reflect 
middle-class perceptions. The effects 
on the poor can be severe. Students 
of consistently spelled languages may 
learn sufficient reading in first grade 
to survive subsequent interruptions. 
Old syllabaries used to accomplish this. 
But more ‘modern’ methods slow down 
the process, leaving students vulnerable 
to unexpected life shocks that may 
leave them functionally illiterate.
The World Literacy Day serves to remind 
us that we must ensure automaticity in 
childhood. This function has a deadline: 
All children must become fluent in one 
or more scripts by age 18 at the latest. 
In the future, biomedical research may 
mitigate this neurological phenomenon, 
but for 2030, the goal is clear. Wars and 
population displacements seem to be 
a feature of human evolution, but the 
education community should be ready. 
Governments and donors should put 
the existing research to use in order 
to achieve a transition to automaticity 
in first grade. In case of an emergency 
disruption, the adults should perform 
more like Sofia than like Maria.
Helen Abadzi is a Greek psychologist 
and researcher at the University of 
Texas at Arlington, Texas. She has spent 
twenty-seven years as a senior education 
specialist at the World Bank and has 
drawn on cognitive psychology and 
neuroscience to improve the outcomes 
of educational investments. Abadzi, who 
was appointed to the five-member Jury 
for the UNESCO International Literacy 
Prizes in 2015, chaired the Jury for the 
2016 prize, a post she held till June 2017.
An imaginary visualization of cerebral 
specialization for different cognitive 
abilities, by Dutch visual artist Merijn Hos.
