Since humans have been able, they 
have sought to understand life in all 
its dimensions, and the world they live 
in. They have used not just language, 
literature, philosophy, education, religion, 
arts, history, anthropology, archaeology 
and sociology, but also economics, 
psychology, media, development, 
sports, gender, finance, marketing, 
political science, environmental studies, 
communication studies, cultural studies 
and law, to interpret and record the world 
around them. Some of these disciplines 
are classified as social sciences because 
of the need for scientific validity, but 
I believe they play a part in the study 
of the humanities as well. 
Using language, human beings have 
produced and privileged their own 
narratives over the narratives derived 
from other regions.  
All civilizations take seriously the 
narratives embodying their cultures, 
knowledge systems and the modes of 
being they create. 
Three events have had a significant 
effect on the place the humanities have 
come to occupy in Western academy 
− the scientific revolution, the industrial 
revolution, and logicism [the modern 
school of mathematical thought, 
founded by German philosopher 
and mathematician Friedrich Ludwig 
Gottlob Frege (1884-1925)]. 
The scientific and industrial revolutions 
have combined to breed logical 
positivism and the conviction that 
all pursuit of knowledge must use 
scientific methodology or lose its validity 
and relevance.
The consequences of this have been 
damning for the intellectual heritages of 
non-European societies – they have often 
been described as primitive, uncivilized, 
pagan and backward. This has allowed 
for the economic appropriation of all 
the resources of these societies through 
colonialism and the enslavement of 
the peoples of Africa. 
Supplanting narratives
The worst scholarship has been the 
approximation of the narratives of Europe 
(and Arabia) to universal truths, and the 
consequent supplanting and substitution 
of the narratives of indigenous societies 
globally by those narratives. This accounts 
for the fact that Africans know little about 
their own ancestors. They use the names, 
languages, the religions, science and 
technologies of others, forgetting − even 
at times, hating − their own indigenous 
knowledge systems, traditions of being, 
values and ethos, and getting lost in 
the world of others.



The importance of
 homegrown
stories
by John Ayotunde Isola Bewaji
The emphasis on bread-and-
butter subjects like science, 
math and technology at 
the expense of the study of 
the humanities, is threatening 
the ability of the people of 
Jamaica and the Caribbean 
to appreciate and tell 
their own stories. 
A mural in homage to Africa 
in a school in the Tower Hill ghetto, 
Kingston, Jamaica.

A number of issues arise here. Firstly, 
industrialization has led to globalization 
of all forms of realities. Globalization is 
inevitable, but it does not prevent the 
peoples of the Caribbean from using their 
African heritage to make meaning of, and 
find paths to civilized existence. It is not 
necessary to fight globalization, but it can 
be enriched, using the historical cultures 
of one’s ancestry.
Secondly, the advocacy for a Science, 
Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) education creates 
a distorted imperative that other 
disciplines, which apparently do not 
provide direct practical benefits to 
society, are of little use. In Jamaica and 
in the West Indies, the emphasis has been 
on science, technology and the social 
sciences at the primary, secondary and 
tertiary education levels. Subjects such 
as fine arts, music, ethics, history, culture 
and heritage are minimized or removed 
from all levels of education, because 
they are not valued as contributors to 
human development. 
At the University of the West Indies 
(UWI), this emphasis on the sciences 
has resulted in the Humanities and 
Education Faculty consistently attracting 
less than twenty-five per cent of the 
entire student population, because 
their contributions to national and 
regional development are undervalued. 
The Jamaican newspaper, The Gleaner, 
has written editorials advocating 
the defunding of disciplines including 
history, the languages, philosophy and 
the arts by the government. Instead, 
it has suggested concentrating on those 
disciplines that would enable Jamaica 
and the region to catch up with the first 
world technologically. The newspaper 
erroneously argues that you do not need 
to know yourself, your realities, your 
society or your ancestry, and that once 
you attain technological parity with 
the West, everything will be fine.
The third issue relates to the declining 
financial fortunes at the national, 
regional and individual levels. Education, 
especially related to the humanities, 
easily gets short-changed when societies 
go through structural adjustments. 
Families and individuals prefer to invest 
in disciplines which are “marketable, 
productive and profile-enhancing”. 
The same applies to countries that 
believe that emphasis should be placed 
on science, engineering, medical 
and technology education, as these 
disciplines are thought to lead to a higher 
productive capacity.
Jamaican transdisciplinary 
artist, Cosmo White, explores 
the notion of identity.

Identities and heritage
The study of the humanities is critical to 
the identity appreciation, configuration 
and projection of a society. When a society 
neglects the understanding, appreciation 
and propagation of the humanities, 
it is open to various forms of abuse, 
the degradation of its heritage and the 
appropriation of its essence. The infliction 
of epistemicide [the killing of knowledge 
systems or the destruction of existing 
knowledge] on the African people in the 
form of “empty baggage syndrome” has 
led to the dispossession of Africans in the 
new world, of their identities and heritage, 
leading to a confused, disoriented and 
dislocated people. 
The rampant violence and incivility in 
Jamaican society is partly a manifestation 
of this. Even while Jamaica has always 
punched above its weight category in all 
walks of life, there persists a preference 
for things Euro-western.
The thinking at the UWI has been a victim 
of the historical circumstances chronicled 
by Jamaican author and educator Errol 
Miller, who writes about the dependency 
of the regional economies after the 
abolition of slavery and emancipation. 
This is why it has not been able to pursue 
wholesome educational paradigms, 
designed to teach the humanities, without 
having to worry about the immediately 
discernible benefits of such teaching. 
UNESCO has continued to lead in 
the development of a more humane 
world, where reason, reflection and 
diversity are valued. However, with the 
resistance to reparation payments to 
the people who have suffered the worst 
form of inhumanity in human history, 
through the horrors of Atlantic slavery, 
it is understandable that countries of 
the Caribbean region are mendicant − 
incapable of taking decisions which will 
uplift their citizens from penury. 
This probably explains why Jamaica 
has one of the highest homicide rates 
in the world, in spite of being the 
birthplace of Marcus Mosiah Garvey 
[Jamaican political leader, journalist 
publisher, and a proponent of the 
pan-Africanism movement(1887-1940)], 
reggae [a style of popular music 
of Jamaican origin] and Usain Bolt 
[Olympic champion sprinter].
Training teachers is key
What can be done to improve humanities 
education in Jamaica and the Caribbean? 
UNESCO’s teacher-training and education 
projects should be enhanced and 
promoted in Jamaica and the Caribbean, 
with UWI leading the way by undertaking 
an introspective engagement of its role 
in humanities education. 

The university needs a full-fledged 
department or school of philosophical 
studies, which would aid critical thinking 
in the study of many other subjects, 
including business, tourism, conflict 
resolution and the environment. 
It is important that the humanities are 
taught at the primary, secondary and 
post-secondary educational institutions 
in Jamaica and the region, because 
the building blocks of peace take place 
in the minds of people. Cultural and 
musical genres of Jamaican origin have 
transcended the shores of Jamaica and 
influenced the entire world, but little 
has been done to teach and develop 
these traditions among Jamaican youth. 
This knowledge could be used to impact 
the creativity of Jamaicans and empower 
them economically.
Finally, it is important to understand 
that the humanities are the foundation 
of everything in knowledge generation 
− its curation, storage, retrieval, 
dissemination and utilization. Rich and 
powerful countries do not leave 
the education of its citizens to others. 
Similarly, weak and poor societies must 
appreciate the need to ensure that their 
own stories are homegrown and delivered 
to society in a wholesome manner that 
is conducive to our collective humanity 
− even in our beautiful diversity.
John Ayotunde Isola Bewaji 
(Jamaican born in Nigeria) is the author 
of several books, including The Rule 
of Law and Governance in Indigenous 
Yoruba Society: A Study in African 
Philosophy of Law. He has been an 
editor of publications including the 
Caribbean Journal of Philosophy (CJP). 
Young men in front of a mural 
in Tower Hill, Kingston, Jamaica.
