Abderrahmane Sissako,  
Mauritanian film director
The UNESCO Courier, 2000-10
Exile is always a handicap. But distance 
allows you to look at your own country, 
its past, its history, from a slightly 
foreign viewpoint. When we talk about 
home, we tend to hesitate, to go by 
feel. It’s a delicate process that you 
can lose a grip on at any moment. 
Maybe we have more sensitivity. 
Sometimes you choose to be silent 
and allow people to interpret. 
Bujor Nedelcovici, 
Romanian novelist, essayist and scriptwriter
The UNESCO Courier, 1996-10 
If exile is an initiation test, it is also 
a test of the truth. It entails shedding 
one’s illusions and the world of wishful 
thinking and pretence, and arriving 
at a kind of lucidity. It means learning 
how to winnow out the wheat from 
the chaff by discarding bogus tolerance, 
which produces a semblance of inner 
peace, in favour of real tolerance, 
which requires one to immerse oneself 
in the universal (...) Involuntary exile 
has become, in my case, voluntary exile 
in search of things past and spiritual 
resurrection. To accept is already 
to effect a return, at least to oneself.
Rithy Panh,  
Cambodian film director 
The UNESCO Courier, 2000-10
When you’re an exile, you don’t 
really have an identity any more. 
Whether in Cambodia or France, 
I’m kind of at home everywhere and 
now. Far and close from everything. 
I’m interested in this distance. It allows 
you to stand back and to see further, 
to grasp the shape of things. The lesser 
evil for an exile is managing to make 
use of this.



You ask me 
what exile is…
The words of exiled creators,  
spoken through our columns
Edouard J. Maunick,  
Mauritian poet
The UNESCO Courier, 1994-3 
Exile becomes hard when loneliness 
sets in, a loneliness that has more to do 
with the memory of something essential 
rooted within oneself than with ordinary 
recollections. Otherwise I do not regard 
exile as painful, because it not only means 
leaving home to go somewhere else, 
it also means stepping forward towards 
yourself, deciding to get to know yourself 
and to live in and with yourself. After living 
through your own tribulations and 
moments of wonderment, you need to find 
out about others, but the first essential is 
self-knowledge. Exile then becomes a quest, 
an expedition into the inner space of others, 
in the course of which one must, above all, 
never give in to the temptation of wanting 
to portray others in one’s own likeness, 
on the pretext of aligning certain details.
Spôjmaï Zariâb,  
Afghan writer 
The UNESCO Courier, 2008-2 
You ask me what exile is… Years ago, 
in a quiet corner of Kabul, I read the 
Persian translation of The Man from Kabul, 
a short story by Rabindranath Tagore. 
With his magical words, this talented 
Indian writer made me discover the 
pain of exile (...) I, who was sheltered 
from misery and who had only known 
war in books, saw myself also sheltered 
from exile… until the end of my days. 
At the time, I ignored that one day, 
alas, history’s unfair hand would turn 
every Afghan into the Man from Kabul 
by Tagore. That history’s folly would 
divide an entire nation and disperse 
the Afghans to all four corners of the 
world, far from their fathers, mothers, 
children, sisters and brothers. Around me, 
I do not know of a single family that was 
spared the torment of exile, and that, 
although without having read Tagore, 
did not live the story of the Man from 
Kabul and did not feel his pain within.
Véronique Tadjo, 
Ivorian writer and painter
The UNESCO Courier, 2008-2 
For a long time, I traveled, my mind and heart 
at peace, telling myself that I could return 
home when I wanted to. Things changed 
with the Ivorian crisis. I had the impression 
the door suddenly closed and left me 
outside. I found it difficult to understand 
what was happening, how we got there. I felt 
alienated, as if everything had to be started 
all over again. Exile begins when you can no 
longer return to the country you left behind, 
when the way back becomes painful.

A bronze sculpture from the series 
“Les  Voyageurs”, by French artist 
Bruno Catalano. 
