Aidan White
Director, Ethical Journalism Network
With growing evidence of interference 
in democratic processes around the 
world, the debate over how to expose 
and eliminate fake news is certain to 
intensify. But the discussion is already 
confused by misunderstanding about 
the phenomenon, its origins, and why 
it poses a threat in the first place. 
To try to illustrate the problem, the 
Ethical Journalism Network (EJN) has 
developed a definition for fake news: 
“Information deliberately fabricated 
and published with the intention to 
deceive and mislead others into believing 
falsehoods or doubting verifiable facts.” 
Using this definition, it is easier to 
separate propaganda, “alternative” facts, 
and malicious lies from journalism.
Verashni Pillay
Editor-in-Chief,  
Huffington Post, South Africa
Fake news poisons the atmosphere that 
we all operate in. Because fake news 
exists, audiences are now doubtful 
about all news. It has really damaged 
the relationship between audience 
members and the media. 
Kari Huhta
Diplomatic Editor,  
Helsingin Sanomat, Finland
We easily exaggerate the effect of fake 
news on journalism. I don’t want to be 
flippant about it − it is a serious challenge 
to society and institutionality. The point 
of fake news is not to tell another 
narrative; the main aim of fake news is 
to dismantle the credibility of institutions, 
including journalism, but not only 
journalism. 
Ivor Gaber
Professor of Journalism,  
University of Sussex, United Kingdom
There has always been fake news − ever 
since people realized the power of 
the media to influence public opinion. 
However, the difference today is that 
social media and platforms like Google 
and Facebook enable fake news to spread 
widely and more quickly than ever 
before, and that is the problem. 
Fake news changes journalism in that it 
presents a real challenge to journalism, 
because it’s not always that easy to 
distinguish fake news from real news, 
but it also makes journalism much more 
important. Because if anybody is going 
to call out fake news, it’s the journalist − 
the responsible journalist, that is. I would 
say that in the short term, fake news is a 
problem for journalists. But in the long 
term, it validates them and gives them 
an increased importance in society.
Ricardo Gandour
Journalism Director,  
CBN, Brazilian Radio Network, Brazil
Fake news reinforces a traditional mission 
of journalism, which is trying to shine 
a light in the dark, for societies and 
the general public. Our mission has to 
be reinforced on this core value, trying 
to illuminate the debate, trying to show 
the public where the real facts and 
the real debates are. 



Fake news 
Sound bites on a burning topic
Fake news, or disinformation, 
is not a new phenomenon. 
But today, with the rise of 
digital media, it spreads easily 
and quickly. It is the task of 
responsible journalists and 
trusted news organizations 
to douse the flames of this 
dangerous wildfire and call fake 
news out for what it really is – 
lies. What do journalists think 
about this? We asked a few of 
them to find out.

Lies in social networks.
Ginna Lindberg
Head, Foreign News,  
Swedish Broadcasting, Sweden
All this talk about fake news is affecting 
media audiences, because there is an 
insecurity about what is true and what is 
not. As professional journalists, we need 
to go back to what we do best – we do 
fact-checking, demand answers, and are 
transparent about our (news-gathering) 
methods.
Catarina Carvalho
Editor-in-Chief,  
Global Media Group, Portugal
Fake news is not journalism. Maybe 
we should think about what we [the 
mainstream media] did to journalism 
that has allowed fake news to become so 
easily accepted and so easily done. I think 
we should do some soul-searching to 
know if we are doing the right thing, if we 
are behaving in the right way, if we are 
being ethical in journalism – that could 
prevent fake news from having the power 
and influence it has, and stop the growth 
it has achieved. 
Maria Ressa
Co-founder & CEO, Rappler, 
the Philippines
Rappler, a social news network committed 
to investigative reporting, has documented 
at least 300 websites spreading fake 
news in the Philippines. One of our 
investigations monitored the growth of 
suspicious Facebook accounts that seeded 
fake news into campaign pages during 
the country’s May 2016 elections. 
It took us about three months to 
manually check the information the 
Facebook accounts provided and 
to verify they were fake. 
We found that one nest of twenty-six 
fake accounts is able to influence nearly 
three million Facebook pages. We 
also know that, as of November 2016, 
about 50,000 Facebook accounts can 
be used in targeted campaigns for or 
against politicians or individuals in the 
Philippines. Another fake account was 
linked to over 990,000 members of 
groups supporting one political leader, 
and yet another was connected to an 
estimated 3.8 million members of various 
overseas Filipino organizations and 
buy-and-sell groups.
With about 54 million Facebook users in 
the Philippines, social media is a powerful 
weapon used to silence dissent and 
mould public opinion. Rappler has lived 
through numerous waves of attacks via 
the internet, including from Facebook 
accounts created specifically to harass 
our reporters and contributors. 
This has only made us more determined 
to expose the lies and prevent their 
spread.
