The November 2016 election of Donald 
Trump for the highest office in the United 
States is the most dramatic example of the 
all-pervasive nature of social media. The 
mainstream media hated him passionately, 
yet the former kingmakers could do 
absolutely nothing as he forced them to 
do his bidding in order not to commit 
commercial suicide in full sight of their readers 
and viewers. And so Donald Trump became 
the first ever US President of Social Media. 
Anyone can be a star
At the dawn of the social media era, the 
old guard dismissed it as a tool for young 
people. Enter YouTube: the world’s biggest 
television repository and video-hosting 
service which creates almost zero content 
itself, but is the haven for all the wannabes 
on earth. Anyone, anywhere in the world 
today, can be whatever they dream of 
– singers, chefs, boxers, media stars. 
The sky is the limit and it’s all for free. 
PewDiePie (born Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg 
in Sweden, October 1989), a web-based 
comedian and video producer, became 
the uncrowned king of YouTube, with 
almost 55 million subscribers! Two of the 
most successful YouTubers in Lithuania 
– Whydotas (Vaidotas Grinceviĉius) and 
The3dvinas (Edvinas Navikas) − have more 
subscribers than the four national TV 
channels combined. 
Of course, new media is not all positive, 
and sometimes comes at a heavy price. 
Fake news, virtual mob lynching, trolls and 
baseless accusations abound – it’s a free-
for-all. There are no filters or editing, and no 
need to exercise restraint or decency if you 
choose not to. 
We are in the throes of a media 
transformation, forced by the ascension 
of the internet. As journalists, we must 
embrace the revolution, and shed any 
of our inhibitions to go digital. With our 
professional qualities, we still have the edge 
over most of the novices out there today. 
The new technologies allow for 
unprecedented freedom, especially in 
countries where the press is controlled 
by the government. Now is the perfect 
time to voice your opinion, and make it 
resonate across the globe. Interacting with 
your audience is critical − instant audience 
feedback is a potent tool. 
Crowdfunded 
by viewers
The changes in journalism can be viewed 
as a positive development. It has forced us 
to be creative, and to invent new business 
models in order to survive, as in our case. 
Propelled by the shock of losing my TV 
programme on Lithuanian television, 
I decided to fight back. Liberty TV was 
founded by me in September 2016. It is a 
completely independent internet television 
channel, crowdfunded by viewers. 



The digital revolution has brought 
monumental changes and 
challenges to the media industry. 
Journalists are best-placed to 
adapt to the new media landscape 
if they embrace new technologies, 
reinvent themselves, and adopt 
new business models. The story 
of Lithuania’s Liberty TV, an 
independent television channel 
broadcast on the internet 
and financed by the public, 
is proof of this.
The digital age is upon us, whether we like 
it not. And if you belong to the media old 
guard, it is quite likely you will not like it. 
Traditional print media and television have 
been caught off guard – technologically, 
financially, and creatively – by the digital 
revolution, and are experiencing the 
biggest challenges they have ever faced. 
Are they up to it? Not really. But they have 
no choice – they can either sink or swim. 
The advent of the internet, nearly thirty 
years ago, has hooked the world onto one 
of the most powerful drugs available to 
modern societies – free and lightning-fast 
access to information. 
Before they knew what hit them, a second 
wave – social media – hit the old guard. It 
was bigger and stronger than the web, and 
with more severe consequences. Social 
media companies gained the upper hand 
as paid subscriptions to newspapers and 
magazines dwindled, and TV channels 
started to lag behind the thousands of 
news websites on the internet. 
Suddenly everyone became the 
media – cameraman, editor, storyteller, 
journalist, promoter – all rolled in one. 
The gatekeepers of information saw their 
gates come crashing down, as they lost the 
biggest privilege of all – the right to decide 
what is important and what is not. 
by Andrius Tapinas
Crowdfunding
to save the media

We reached our financial goal of €15,000 
in ten days, just in time for the launch. 
Almost 5,000 people committed to funding 
us in the first month. Subscribers are free 
to pledge their support for whatever 
duration they choose, with no obligation to 
continue. For a nation of less than 3 million 
people, this was phenomenal. We are 
also funded by commercial sponsors who 
are prepared to accept that there will be 
no strings attached. 
A proven 
business model
Putting myself and my team into the hands 
of the public was the biggest gamble 
of my journalistic career. Would they be 
willing to pay for something they could 
get for free but would cease to exist if they 
didn’t pay for it? Are we public-spirited 
enough to support independent media 
by contributing to it? Media experts in 
Lithuania were sceptical. But we went 
ahead nevertheless.
In March 2017, we suggested that our 
viewers use their ability to direct two per 
cent of their taxes to Liberty TV. We are 
curious to see how much funding we are 
able to raise with this initiative. 
In four months, Liberty TV became the 
biggest media entity on Lithuanian 
YouTube, with some of its programmes 
reaching six-figure viewership numbers 
and competing with the most popular 
shows on mainstream TV. In eight months, 
media experts started to admit that they 
had been wrong, and started reporting 
about our plans to expand. 
Our business model is new and falls 
in line with the digital revolution, but 
it is not unique. Similar crowdfunded 
journalistic projects have been launched 
in Holland, Switzerland, India, and several 
other countries. 
It is not easy; it is the hardest job I have ever 
done in my career of almost twenty years. 
But it is the only way I would like to go 
further as a journalist. And it is the digital 
revolution that gave me this chance.
Andrius Tapinas is a Lithuanian 
journalist and writer. He founded Liberty 
TV in 2016 and is the host of its flagship 
programme, “Hang in there”. Tapinas 
is one of the most popular persons 
on Lithuanian social media, with over 
130,000 Facebook followers.
Last recording of the season of  
“Hang in there!” with Andrius Tapinas, 
which attracted a live audience of 
over 2000 (23 May 2017), in Klaipeda, 
Lithuania’s largest port city. 
© Matas Baranauskas
We broadcast fifteen programmes each 
month, and add at least three more 
in the autumn of 2017. The content 
includes political satire in Lithuanian 
and Russian, talk shows, investigative 
journalism, political analysis and positive 
documentaries. 
Our staff (made up of full-time and 
freelance professionals) includes a 
full technical crew – from editors to 
cameramen, journalists and script-writers. 
A small administrative team also handles 
communication for the channel. Our 
flagship programmes are filmed in theatres 
with high-definition cameras, in front of live 
audiences of 200 to 250 people. 
We are a non-profit, so we have to make 
sure we balance our books. This calls for 
austerity. Most of our equipment is rented, 
or comes with the professionals we hire. 
Most of our work is done online, and we 
use a tiny office space for meetings and 
editing. We plan to relocate to a larger 
office in autumn 2017.
