A Syrian boy 
waits for the rain to 
stop in an old shopping 
centre outside Tripoli 
(Lebanon), currently 
occupied by 300 refugee 
families, 2016. The little 
we know about displaced 
people mostly concerns 
those living in camps, but 
over half of all the world’s 
refugees are in urban areas.

Hijacked Education
Text: Katerina Markelova 
Photos: Diego Ibarra Sánchez / MeMo
Having a mother who was a teacher, 
Diego was already aware of the challenges 
of education when he set off for Pakistan 
in 2009, at the age of 27. At the time, 
the country was in the clutches of a 
violent Taliban campaign against the 
school system. That is when he launched 
the Hijacked Education project, 
which the Courier highlights in this Zoom.
In 2014, Diego moved to Lebanon, 
where he still lives today, with his wife 
and two-year-old son. He has continued 
to develop his work on the theme of 
school in the time of war, going to Syria, 
Iraq and Colombia.
“Unfortunately, the chapter is not closed 
yet,” says Diego. “This is still very much 
how life is in many parts of the world, 
and so my project is ongoing. We consume 
millions of images without taking the time 
to digest them. In passing from one reality 
to another, without pausing, we have 
become ‘tourists’ of the pain of others,” 
he adds. Using the power of his work as 
a photographer, he attempts to encourage 
the hurried ‘tourists’ that we are, to stop 
and think, and to help to defuse 
the ticking time bomb that is threatening 
so many of the world’s school children.
“Time, a time bomb, stagnates in 
exile and blots the sheets of school 
calendars that will never return.” 
Spanish photojournalist Diego Ibarra 
Sánchez uses this metaphor to express 
a thought that has been haunting him 
for a long time – war is wiping out 
the future of an entire generation.
According to UNESCO, only half of refugee 
children and a quarter of adolescents 
attend school, while over 28 million 
children living in regions affected by 
conflicts do not go to school at all.
Too often the effects of war on education 
are missed by the lenses of war 
photographers. Teachers are murdered, 
schools are destroyed or converted 
to military bases, there is profound 
psychological trauma – and, in the end, 
millions of children are deprived of 
access to an education. Going beyond 
the sensationalism of images of war, 
Diego wants to show how the future of 
a ‘lost generation’ is being destroyed.
The scars of war.  
A destroyed classroom seen through a hole 
in the wall, Hasakah, Syria, 13 April 2016.

Performance by French association Clowns Sans Frontières 
in a Lebanese school for refugee children, December 2014.  
Half of the world’s refugees are children. Most of them live in developing 
countries, where many schools already have difficulties educating 
children from their local communities. 

A bus service arranged by UNICEF/Caritas 
in the Beqaa Valley (Lebanon) 
enables Syrian refugee children 
to go to school regularly, March 2017. 
Hundreds of textbooks set aflame by ISIS militants in a school in al-Shaddadi (Syria), April 2016. 
Schools, like hospitals, are among the most dangerous places in the country. 
Yet, there is provision for the protection of schools and hospitals under the 1907 Convention 
concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land. 


A young Syrian 
refugee plays in 
a makeshift shelter 
erected in an informal 
camp on the outskirts 
of Zahlé, Lebanon, 
16 December 2016. 
Globally, the number 
of displaced persons 
has reached levels 
never recorded before. 
In 2015, 65.3 million 
people were forcibly 
displaced.  
Fifty-three per cent 
of refugees originate 
from Syria, Somalia 
or Afghanistan. 

The main entrance of this boys’ school 
in Pakistan was bricked up after 
an explosion in April 2013. The Declaration 
on Security in Schools – put forward in 2015 
by the Global Coalition to Protect Education 
from Attack, of which UNESCO is a founder 
member – has currently been approved 
by sixty-nine countries. 
Pakistani boys from a school blown up by the Taliban have to study outside (2013). 
“In conflict situations, schools, teachers, schoolchildren are not collateral damage  
– they are directly targeted,” says Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO. 
Remains of a blackboard in a school 
in Swabi (Pakistan), destroyed 
in August 2012. The photo was taken 
in 2013. In the majority of countries 
suffering from armed conflict, the military 
use of schools and other educational 
institutions remains a constant feature 
of war, according to UNESCO.

Portrait of a Syrian refugee boy, Lebanon, July 2017. 
Nearly three million children in Syria have never known peace, 
and suffer from psychosocial distress.
