The cultural goods market is a grey 
market, where clean and dirty goods 
circulate together. While it is difficult to 
estimate the value of the illicit market, 
it is possible to get some idea of the scale. 
Speaking to the International Herald 
Tribune (15 February 2005), archaeologist 
John Russell estimated that between 
March 2003 and early 2005, 400,000 
to 600,000 antiquities may have been 
looted from Iraq, generating between 
$10 million and $20 million. 
Facts and figures on illicit trade are 
notoriously difficult to document, 
even in relation to “ordinary” organized 
crime in relatively stable environments. 
Such difficulties are multiplied in 
a conflict with myriad, shifting internal 
factions and changing external 
facilitators. They are multiplied even 
further in cases where the war and 
the war economy are so interdependent. 
There are literally dozens of specific, 
yet baseless, claims in relation to Syria 
and Iraq alone.
Even when there is documented 
evidence, it can be difficult to interpret. 
For example, as the United States Counter 
Threat Finance and Sanctions explained, 
on 15th May 2015, US Special Forces 
in Syria raided the base of Abu Sayyaf, 
the head of underground resources (oil, 
gas, minerals and antiquities) for ISIS. 
They recovered a number of receipts 
for antiquities that indicated a one-fifth 
(khums) tax of $265,000 on sales of $1.32 
million in Deir ez-Zor province within four 
months, which would probably mean 
taxes of around $800,000 on sales of an 
estimated $4 million in a year.



Curbing the spoils of war
by Samuel Hardy
Since the adoption of UN 
Security Council Resolution 
2199 in 2015, which calls for 
the prohibition of trade in 
cultural property from Iraq 
and Syria, efforts have been 
intensified to disrupt terrorist 
financing through the illicit 
trafficking of antiquities. 
A global movement launched 
by UNESCO urges Member 
States to introduce more 
stringent legislation.
Poster of the exhibition “Trafficking 
of antiquities: Stop it!!!”, Archaeological 
Museum of Thessaloniki, 2012.

This is a very limited sample, however. 
The availability and marketability of 
antiquities and other illicit revenue 
streams are specific to that region; 
and the people, materials and activities 
on which specific earnings were spent 
are unknown. Nonetheless, in an illicit 
economy as in a licit economy, all revenue 
streams support the taxing authorities.
Dismantling  
of trafficking routes
According to the INTERPOL National 
Central Bureau for Lebanon, trafficking 
of antiquities from Syria through 
Lebanon is an organized criminal 
endeavour, which has increased 
exponentially through the present war. 
Yet, in spite of its own challenges in terms 
of governance and security, Lebanon has 
been able to dismantle gang after gang, 
six in 2016 alone. Many more supply lines 
for illicit antiquities could be disrupted, 
if other transit and market countries took 
their responsibilities equally seriously.
There are a few similar successes, 
although they demonstrate the range of 
structures and mechanisms for conflict 
antiquities trafficking. Police in Germany 
caught a group who, between 2011 
and 2014, had been stealing cultural 
objects locally to support militant groups 
including Ahrar al-Sham, Junud al-Sham 
and ISIS in Syria. In 2014, the Civil Guard 
of Spain caught a group who had been 
trafficking antiquities from Egypt in order 
to finance jihadists.
Tragically, there are also notable 
failures. According to an ongoing 
investigation by Paris Match Belgique, 
initially published on 27 October 2016, 
Khalid el Bakraoui had been ransoming 
works of art stolen from the Museum Van 
Buuren in Belgium, to three insurance 
companies between 2013 and 2015, 
before his suicide bombing of the 
Maelbeek metro station in Brussels 
on 22 March 2016.
Restitutions
Contrary to denials that antiquities from 
Syria and Iraq are reaching the market, they 
have been intercepted in Bulgaria (in 2015), 
Hungary (in 2017), Slovenia (in 2016) and 
France (in 2016). Antiquities from the 
war-torn zones have also been intercepted, 
then released, and even advertised in the 
United Kingdom (in 2015), as revealed by 
archaeologists Mark Altaweel and David 
Gill in the Guardian (July 2015) and on 
Channel 4 (April 2016).
Although it is not reflected in public evidence, 
“several countries around Europe” alone 
have intercepted and repatriated antiquities, 
as the Director-General of Antiquities and 
Museums in Syria told Al-Masdar News 
(May 2017). At least 300 cultural objects 
seized between 2012 and 2014 have been 
repatriated to Syria, the Directorate-General 
of Antiquities in Lebanon informed 
the Daily Star (January 2017). 

A poster, entered in the Poster Contest 
against the illicit trafficking of cultural 
property, an awareness-raising initiative 
launched in 2013 by the UNESCO office 
in Montevideo, Uruguay.

They included objects that had been 
looted from Palmyra before it was 
conquered by ISIS, when it was under 
the control of first the Free Syrian Army, 
and then the Syrian Arab Republic. 
Yet tens of thousands of genuine antiquities 
from Iraq and Syria (and modern fakes, 
forgeries and counterfeits) have been seized 
in the region and further afield since 2011 in 
the case of Syria, and 1990 in the case of Iraq.
An overwhelming majority of looted 
antiquities have not been restituted 
to Syria since 2011. 
Exhibition at the Colosseum in Rome, 
in 2010, of 337 stolen works of art which 
were recovered by Italy’s carabinieri.

This may be due to the technical difficulty 
of attributing modern state ownership 
on the basis of ancient cultural style and 
the deliberate destruction of forensic 
evidence of the countries of origin by 
looters, smugglers, dealers and collectors. 
It could also be attributed to the legal 
difficulty of international relations in 
situations of non-recognition of state-like 
authorities, or to the political exploitation 
of cultural diplomacy. Iraq is still 
struggling to recover the antiquities 
that were looted during the crises that 
erupted in 1990 and 2003. 
Nothing new  
or unusual
To reduce the trafficking of conflict 
antiquities in the future, it is important 
to acknowledge the existence of similar 
trafficking in the past. The situation 
in Syria and Iraq is not unprecedented 
or unusual. In the early 1990s, the security 
services were laundering stolen art 
through antique shops in Yugoslavia. 
Right-wing paramilitaries were trafficking 
art in Colombia. By the end of the 1990s, 
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam 
were selling antiquities to finance their 
war in Sri Lanka. Around the same time, 
the Northern Alliance and the Taliban 
(which continues to operate today) 
and some years before that, jihadis 
and the mujahideen looted, smuggled 
and racketeered in art and artefacts in 
Afghanistan. In Lebanon too, during 
the civil war between 1975 and 1990, 
militias looted and exported antiquities.
The history of conflict antiquities 
trafficking as a state crime goes back at 
least a century-and-a-half. This included 
payment in kind for assassinations 
by the junta in Argentina; self-subsidy 
by the Communists in Bulgaria, or plunder 
by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.
Again and again, conflict antiquities have 
been supplied to, and consumed by local, 
regional and global markets. In some 
cases, it has happened without effective 
regulation by the market countries who 
created the demand and whose markets 
subsidized the conflict. In others, it has 
taken place with the complicity of states 
who facilitated the financing of proxies, 
allies and other convenient armed 
groups. It has even happened under 
the meticulous management of states.
Confronted with such evidence, 
it becomes impossible to maintain 
the reassuring myths that conflict 
financing through antiquities trafficking 
is not happening at all, that it is not 
making a difference to the development 
of those conflicts or that it can be 
suppressed with exceptional measures 
against particular organizations. The only 
way to constrict this kind of trafficking 
is through the policing and regulation of 
the conflict antiquities market.
Resolution 2199
In response to the terrorist violence of 
ISIS, al-Nusra Front (ANF) and others 
associated with al Qaeda (AQ), the United 
Nations Security Council passed 
Resolution 2199 in 2015. It consolidates 
financial sanctions on these groups, 
in order to restrict their violence by 
constricting their funding and spending, 
such as their income from looting, 
smuggling and otherwise profiteering off 
the illicit trade in cultural objects.
Reaffirming Resolution 1483 of 2003, 
which requires states to prohibit the trade 
or transfer of cultural goods suspected 
to have been illegally removed from Iraq 
(from 6 August 1990) and to facilitate 
the safe return of such objects to 
Iraq, Resolution 2199 replicates those 
legally-binding measures for cultural goods 
that are suspected to have been illegally 
removed from Syria since March 2011.
Since then, Resolution 2253, passed 
in 2015, has obliged states to report 
seizures of cultural objects from Iraq and 
Syria and the outcomes of proceedings 
against antiquities traffickers that finance 
ISIS, ANF, AQ and/or their associates. 
These targeted measures have been 
complemented by Resolution 2347 of 
2017 (see p. 7), which requests states 
to prohibit the trade or transfer of 
cultural goods from any zone of conflict 
or context of conflict.

The Mask of Gorgon is a sculpture stolen 
in 1996 from the ancient Roman site 
of Hippo Regius (Annaba) in Algeria 
and restituted by Tunisia in 2014. 
Several states claim to have taken action 
that contributes to the implementation 
of the UN Security Council Resolution 
2199. For example, Cyprus has revised 
procedures to facilitate law enforcement. 
Pakistan has worked to improve the 
capacity of law enforcement agents to 
fight illicit trafficking, by disseminating 
the International Council of Museums’ 
(ICOM) Emergency Red List of Syrian 
Cultural Objects at Risk. The Canadian, 
Czech, French, Macedonian (FYROM) 
and Pakistani authorities, among others, 
have also intensified customs controls.
Significant legislative efforts include 
Germany’s 2016 Act on the Protection 
of Cultural Property, which consolidates, 
implements and strengthens many 
instruments, notably universalizing the 
responsibility to observe due diligence 
in trading and retaining records of 
transactions. Following Germany’s 
model, the Council of Europe’s 2017 
Convention on Offences relating to 
Cultural Property, which is open to 
signature by any state, closes many 
common loopholes − for example, 
by criminalizing the import, acquisition 
and/or marketing of looted, stolen  

Since it is a lamented fact that cultural 
property offenders remain in business, 
the convention is also significant 
because it enables the disqualification 
of cultural property convicts from 
trading in cultural property.
Still, many of those states that have 
technically “done something”, have only 
reaffirmed or reiterated generic existing 
measures. UNESCO has been forced 
to reiterate its appeal to states to take 
even minimal practical measures, such 
as reporting seizures of cultural objects 
from conflict zones, while urging parties 
to the 1970 Convention on the Means 
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit 
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership 
of Cultural Property to implement 
resolutions 2199 and 2253 in law.
Samuel Hardy is an Honorary 
Research Associate at the Institute 
of Archaeology, University College, 
London. He investigates trafficking 
of antiquities in conflicts and crises, 
particularly by and for terrorists, armed 
groups and repressive regimes. 
