
Text: Katerina Markelova
Photos : Marion Laumonier, Paul Laumonier, Bēni 
This is how Marion describes Gran Chaco, 
the vast arid plain that the country shares 
with Argentina, Brazil and Bolivia. And 
for good reason: “We had to drive for 
fourteen hours before we arrived at our 
destination,” she emphasizes.
Their destination: the settlement of 
the Xákmok Kásek. According to the 
International Work Group for Indigenous 
Affairs (IWGIA), the Xákmok Kásek 
(or ‘many little parrots’) are one of the 
531 indigenous communities of the 
Paraguayan Chaco area. They have been 
progressively ejected from their ancestral 
lands since the end of the nineteenth 
century. In 2010, the community 
consisted of 268 individuals belonging 
to sixty-six families. On 24 August 
2010, after thirty years of legal battles, 
the Xákmok Kásek won a court case 
in the Inter-American Court of Human 
Rights(IACHR), ordering the Paraguayan 
authorities to return 10,700 hectares 
of land to the community. Spurred on 
by this judgement and in spite of the 
reticence of the state to follow through, 
the community moved back onto its 
territory in early 2015. 
Five continents, five years of encounters, 
tens of thousands of kilometres travelled, 
and in the end, there is one single 
conclusion: we are ONE humankind. This 
is how French photographer and visual 
artist Bēni sums up the IDENTiTESproject 
odyssey, which he launched in 2013. It is 
a multifaceted photographic adventure 
that is taking him to the four corners 
of the planet. From Hanoi to La Paz, via 
Accra, Bēni’s lens captures the faces of 
the world and brings them together in 
an impressive series of portraits. “We set 
off for somewhere else, for something 
different, for the other, only to end up 
finding ourselves,” he explains. 
Let’s join him in Paraguay, on the Ruta 
Transchaco, National Route 9, the unique 
800- kilometre highway that links the 
capital, Asunción, with the Bolivian border. 
It is 2015. IDENTiTESproject#3 is in full 
swing. The third stage of Bēni’s project 
is in South America, and it is the first 
time he is not travelling by himself. He is 
accompanied by the Laumonier siblings, 
Marion and Paul, who are assisting him 
and documenting the journey. After 
four months of crossing through Chile, 
Argentina and Uruguay, we find them in a 
vehicle heading towards “one of the most 
isolated regions anywhere on earth today”. 

My face, my land
Xákmok Kásek children take part 
in the collective creation workshop 
alongside their elders.
This photo essay is published to coincide 
with the International Day of the World’s 
Indigenous People, celebrated on 9 August 
every year.
The photos of the IDENTiTESproject 
are published under the licence Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0.

The IDENTiTESproject cameras were 
there at exactly the right time to capture 
the event. “They’d been on the site for 
less than ten days,” says Marion. It was 
a moment of great exhilaration − the 
atmosphere was electrifying. But the return 
to their ancestral lands has been far from 
triumphant. “They’ve been living in terrible 
conditions, sleeping in tents, catching 
fish for food and drinking from ponds of 
stagnant water”, she adds. Intensive cattle-
farming and soya cultivation have caused 
often irreversible harm to the soil and the 
forest. The very identity of the indigenous 
people is being severely tested – their 
beliefs, modes of subsistence and cultural 
practices are all intimately connected to 
their ancestral lands. 
Bēni was in Paraguay at the time, to 
organize the project’s flagship − a 
co•creation workshop. It is no accident 
that he decides to place the land at the 
centre of the artistic sequence. The end 
result is a unique moment of sharing, 
filled with emotion, and deeply spiritual. 
“The village chief told us that this 
project has been especially important 
for the members of his community. Even 
though they were still very bound to the 
struggle to regain their land, working 
with us has given them the opportunity 
to think about something else, to have 
some different time together, just for 
themselves,” explains Marion.
Today, the community has regained 
possession of 7,901 hectares, or about 
seventy-three per cent of the lands 
that are rightfully theirs, according to 
Oscar Ayala from the NGO, Tierraviva, 
which represented the Xákmok Kásek 
at the IACHR in 2010. 

LINKS Project
According to the Council on 
Hemispheric Affairs, Paraguay 
has one of the fastest rates of 
deforestation in the world. Launched 
in 2002, UNESCO’s Local and 
Indigenous Knowledge Systems 
(LINKS) programme has brought 
to international attention the role 
of indigenous communities in 
conserving biodiversity and adapting 
to the effects of climate change. 
The return of the Xákmok Kásek 
is therefore cause for hope. Their 
ancestral knowledge, together with 
the government programme for the 
reforestation of Chaco, announced 
in February 2017, should make it 
possible to rehabilitate the land. 
Stills from the Chaco video, tracing the 
stages of the co∙creation workshop − from 
collecting plants and soil to their use in a 
drawing, to the night-time projection of 
portraits, enabling the outlines of the faces 
to be traced onto a jute canvas.

Serafin (1), Nency (2), Gustavo (3) and a baby girl (4) look into Bēni’s lens. Everyone leaves this exercise carrying an image of the other inside themselves. 

So-called “fusion” portraits, embodying the idea of co∙creation. 

The Xákmok Kásek saved all 
the original portraits produced 
during the workshop, 
to be used later, as needed.

At the time this issue of the UNESCO 
Courier is published, Bēni is travelling 
across Europe, on the final stage of 
his project. His round-the-world tour 
ends in Paris in August 2017, with a 
special initiative – the project team 
attempts to create a massive European 
face in collaboration with several 
French artists. Each time he returns to 
France, Bēni also organizes the BACKTO 
exhibitions, representing the different 
stages of the project – photographic 
portraits, co•creation and street- gallery 
workshops. These ephemeral galleries are 
mounted in the public space. The profits 
from these exhibitions and other public 
awareness-raising initiatives are donated 
to the local communities featured, to help 
support their development.
Bēni says he wants to take a break once 
the European tour is over, “to take a 
bit of time, maybe a year, off.” But he is 
already thinking about a book, which, 
according to him, “will bring the five 
continents together and enable us – and 
especially me − to understand what has 
been going on since 2013.” He also plans 
to make a documentary and organize 
a major exhibition, tracing the entire 
journey. He already has a title for this, 
which is the very DNA of the project: 
“ONE WORLD • ONE PEOPLE”. 
Back in Paris, Bēni and his 
team prepare an exhibition 
on IDENTiTEproject#3. 
The BACKTOamerica exhibition 
traces the third stage of the project, 
aiming to raise public awareness 
about the Xákmok Kásek community.
To use as visuals for communications, 
the IDENTiTESproject selects one portrait from 
each leg of the journey, onto which a world 
map is applied to symbolize the existence of just 
ONE humanity, in all its diversity.
