To understand the background of 
the international system during this 
period, it is important not to read the 
history of these early years through 
the lens of much later developments. 
Re-reading those formative years with 
what I have called a “period eye” allows 
us to appreciate the extent to which the 
international system – including UNESCO 
– existed on a shifting landscape, an 
unsettled firmament that would continue 
to be in motion to a greater or lesser 
degree over the succeeding decades.
Mark Goodale
In 1947 and 1948, UNESCO 
conducted a worldwide 
survey of a diverse group of 
intellectuals, political leaders, 
theologians, social activists 
and other personalities to 
gather their opinions on the 
philosophical foundations of 
human rights. A survey that was 
not widely publicized at the 
time, but one that is surprisingly 
relevant today.
The international system that was 
created in the aftermath of the Second 
World War took time to emerge. This is, 
of course, true institutionally – agencies 
had to be created, headquarters had to 
be built, staff and leadership positions 
had to be filled. The difficulties with this 
“practical” aspect of the new post-war 
order should not be underestimated. 
For example, during its first twelve years, 
the headquarters of UNESCO were 
located in the Hotel Majestic in Paris’s 
16th arrondissement, where bedrooms 
and bathrooms were used for offices 
and closets and bath-tubs were used to 
store files. 
But the complications were even greater 
at the political level. Although the general 
outlines of the relationships between 
the various international agencies were 
spelled out in charters and constitutions, 
the actual interactions between these 
organizations were ambiguous, to say the 
least, in those early years. 



Seventy-year-old views
that remain
contemporary 
Such a perspective is particularly 
pertinent in the area of human rights. 
The embryonic international community 
faced two main problems in 1945. The 
first was how to organize itself in a world 
devastated by global war and shaped 
by the contours of colonialism. Would 
Realpolitik continue to prevail – in a 
world in which national sovereignty and 
interests were paramount – or would a 
new, egalitarian model be created, one 
that would redistribute power along new 
political and geographic lines? 
Children of United Nations staff 
members in New York take a close look 
at the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, two years after it was adopted on 
10 December 1948.

It was not entirely clear what would be 
needed for this “faith in fundamental 
human rights” to take more concrete 
forms. As the answer to the first question 
suggests, the powerful members at 
the core of the new UN system were 
reluctant to create any structure that 
could pose a threat – however abstract 
– to their political and legal prerogatives. 
Nevertheless, there was sufficient support 
for what United States president, Harry 
Truman, described as an “international 
bill of rights” that the UN Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC) created an 
international Commission on Human 
Rights (CHR) in 1946, with eighteen 
members and with Eleanor Roosevelt 
as its chair. 
Even so, the actual procedure through 
which the CHR was supposed to produce 
a bill of human rights was left open. More 
specifically, it was not at all clear in 1946 
how the CHR would establish the moral, 
religious and philosophical principles 
on which such a bill of human rights 
should be based. It was clear that they 
should be universal and not privilege 
any one national, regional, or cultural 
tradition. But where were such principles 
to be found? 
An unprecedented 
approach
It was at this moment that UNESCO 
boldly entered the picture. It should 
be remembered that Julian Huxley, the 
controversial and charismatic first Director-
General of UNESCO, had written a sixty-
page blueprint for the new Organization, 
titled UNESCO: Its Purpose and its 
Philosophy (1946). In it, Huxley makes 
the argument that a special international 
agency was needed in order to help the 
world overcome its many divisions. 
Huxley believed that this only would 
take place if what he called a “world 
philosophy” could be developed through 
cultural understanding, education, 
and scientific collaboration. For 
Huxley, UNESCO was to be this unique 
international agency, charged with 
overseeing the emergence of what he 
described as a “single world culture, with 
its own philosophy and background 
of ideas.” 
It was not surprising, therefore, that 
the proceedings of the first UNESCO 
General Conference in Paris took place 
in this spirit of visionary activism for the 
new Organization.  
The creation of the United Nations 
Security Council was the answer to the 
first question. Not only would the UN 
system be one in which the nation-state 
would continue to play a foundational 
role; it would be a system that both 
reflected and legitimated the fact that 
certain countries were more powerful 
than others. 
The second question was related to the 
first, but was even more complicated. 
Given the horrors that had been 
unleashed during the recent global 
conflict – horrors that followed only two 
decades after the unprecedented carnage 
and destruction of the First World War 
– what kind of moral statement could 
the international community make that 
would adequately express its collective 
outrage and hope, however utopian, for 
a better future? 
The answer, or the beginning of the 
answer to the second question, was to 
be found in the 1945 UN Charter, which 
examined the ravages of genocide and 
imperial militarism and nevertheless 
“reaffirm[ed] faith in fundamental human 
rights [and] in the dignity and worth of 
the human person.” 

Working with a sense of urgency – since 
they worried that UNESCO’s human rights 
activities would be overshadowed by the 
much more high-profile labours of the 
CHR under Roosevelt – Huxley and Havet 
got right to work to design a procedure. 
After several false starts, they decided 
to do something unprecedented – to 
conduct a global survey among a diverse 
group of intellectuals, political leaders, 
theologians, social activists and others, 
in order to establish the philosophical 
principles of human rights. 
To do this, they prepared two documents 
– the first, an aide-mémoire, which 
provided a short history of national 
human rights declarations and outlined 
the important stakes involved in drafting 
an international declaration; and second, 
a list of specific human rights and 
freedoms that respondents were asked to 
consider in their replies. 
In March and April 1947, between 150 to 
170 of these surveys were dispatched to 
an impressive list of social institutions, 
state organizations, and individuals. 

Around sixty responses were eventually 
received by UNESCO – they were not 
nearly as comprehensive as accounts 
of the process described, either at the 
time, or decades later. Nevertheless, the 
UNESCO human rights survey managed 
to capture a spectrum of viewpoints on 
the question of human rights that was 
arguably wider and more diverse than 
that produced by the CHR.
The verdict
Under Havet’s supervision, UNESCO 
convened an experts committee in 
Paris in late June 1947 to evaluate the 
responses and produce a report to be 
sent to the CHR, so that it could use 
UNESCO’s findings as the basis for the 
eventual human rights declaration. 
Apart from electing Huxley as its first 
head, UNESCO also established a number 
of major priorities for the coming year. 
One of these instructed the Secretariat 
to “clarify the principles on which might 
be founded a modern declaration of the 
Rights of Man” [Records of the General 
Conference, first session, 1946, p.236]. 
This was precisely the mandate that 
Huxley needed. In his view, a decisive 
intervention in the field of human rights 
would quickly establish UNESCO as the 
leading UN agency, the fulcrum of the 
post-war international system, with a 
unique role as the guardian of what he 
called a “unifying and unified” global 
culture.
The unit within UNESCO that was 
responsible for carrying out this mandate 
was the philosophy subsection of what 
was in the beginning the Subcommission 
on Philosophy and Humanistic Studies. 
It was headed by a young French 
philosopher, Jacques Havet, who had 
recently published a well-received book 
on Kant (Kant et le problème du temps, 
1947). Havet would go on to play a key 
role in UNESCO’s first human rights 
project, although the extent of his 
influence was not known until recently.
Detail from the Camouflage installation 
on the windows of an abandoned 
electricity power plant in Rijeka, Croatia, 
2016, by the Spanish artist, Pejac. It is 
a tribute to Belgian artist René Magritte.

As scholars, international officials, 
and activists struggle to reassert the 
legitimacy of human rights in the face 
of contemporary challenges such as 
resurgent nationalism, the weakening 
of the European Union, and especially 
global inequality, the UNESCO human 
rights survey is proving to be an 
extraordinary, if unexpected, resource 
for new perspectives as well as, at least 
potentially, new solutions. 
Professor of Cultural and Social 
Anthropology and Director of the 
Laboratory of Cultural and Social 
Anthropology (LACS) at the University of 
Lausanne, Switzerland, Mark Goodale 
(United States) is the editor of the 
Stanford Studies in Human Rights series 
and the author or editor of thirteen 
volumes, including Letters to the Contrary: 
A Curated History of the UNESCO Human 
Rights Survey (Stanford, 2018). This book 
analyses dozens of recently discovered 
documents about UNESCO’s activities in 
the field of human rights during the first 
two years of the Organization’s existence, 
thus expanding and revising the general 
history of human rights.
The experts committee – E. H. Carr 
(chair), Richard McKeon (rapporteur), 
Pierre Auger, Georges Friedmann, 
Étienne Gilson, Harold Laski (see p.13), 
Luc Somerhausen, and Lo Chung-Shu 
(see p. 30) – debated the survey results 
and sent its conclusions to the CHR in 
August 1947. At the same time, they 
discussed the possibility of publishing 
some of the survey’s responses, which 
became the basis for the UNESCO 
volume, Human Rights: Comments and 
Interpretations (1949).
Meanwhile, throughout most of 1947, 
there was much confusion among the 
different UN states about just which 
agency was responsible for drafting the 
human rights declaration. Both Huxley 
and Havet had suggested that UNESCO 
was undertaking the survey as either the 
leading institution, or, at the least, in close 
collaboration with the CHR. Yet, when 
UNESCO’s report was finally considered 
by the CHR, in a closed session in Geneva 
in December 1947, it was met with 
confusion, and even anger. 
Apparently the majority of the CHR 
members had no idea that UNESCO was 
undertaking such a survey. In the end, by 
a vote of 8 to 4 (with one abstention), the 
CHR decided not to distribute UNESCO’s 
report to its member states or include 
it as part of the drafting process that 
would eventually lead to the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). 
Lessons for the future
Yet, in spite of the fact that the UNESCO 
human rights survey of 1947-1948 did 
not serve its original purposes, it remains 
strikingly relevant today. The responses 
offer a unique window into the diversity 
of thinking about basic issues of human 
dignity, society, and rights and duties, 
among many others, in the period before 
the UDHR codified a much more limited 
understanding of the Rights of Man. 
As recent research on the survey 
demonstrates, the ability to rewind the 
history of human rights back to this 
transitional post-war era has given us an 
unexpected treasure-trove of ideas at a 
moment in time in which the status of 
human rights is as threatened as ever. 
Fragile, a poster by Greek designer 
Dimitris Arvanitis, one of the 
participants in the One for all, all for 
one! competition organized in 2018 by 
4tomorrow, to celebrate the seventieth 
anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. 
