The Synchrotron-light for Experimental 
Science and Applications (SESAME), 
is the first international centre of its 
kind in the Middle East. It is a powerful, 
high-precision research microscope. In 
it, the electrons accelerate very rapidly 
up to the speed of light in hollow and 
magnetized rings. The acceleration of 
these electrons produces packets of 
concentrated intense light. These beams 
are stored and directed to research 
samples because this light reveals new 
and deep dimensions in the researchers' 
samples. Research areas range from 
physics to molecular chemistry and 
nanoscience – with applications in 
archaeology, environmental sciences, 
agriculture, engineering, pharmacology, 
medicine and industry. Crystallography 
studies of synchrotrons have contributed 
to the award of five Nobel prizes in 
recent years.
Scientists from the Middle East – 
regardless of their speciality, nationality 
or religious belief – will no longer have 
to leave their own regions to carry out 
research in major centres abroad, or 
abandon their research interests because 
of a lack of advanced facilities at home.  



SESAME: 
Scientific excellence
in the Middle East
Anoud Al-Zou’bi
The SESAME international centre for scientific research, a 
competitive synchrotron light source and the first in the Middle 
East and neighbouring countries, was inaugurated in Allan, 
Jordan, on 16 May 2017. This pioneering project, established 
under the auspices of UNESCO, is the result of fourteen years 
of hard work, uniting eight countries around a twofold goal – 
to consolidate scientific excellence in the region and to build 
cross‑border collaboration, dialogue and understanding 
between scientists with diverse cultural, political and 
religious backgrounds.
A 360-degree view of the Synchrotron-light 
for Experimental Science and 
Applications in the Middle East (SESAME), 
Jordan, December 2017.
With this article, the Courier marks 
the celebration of the World Science 
Day for Peace and Development, 
10 November.

At the SESAME centre, they can use 
synchrotron radiation to study samples, 
make new discoveries in different areas 
of science, analyse their results, and 
exchange data. The centre will enable 
them to establish research networks 
with other researchers in the region 
and with those working in over sixty 
synchrotron facilities in twenty-five 
countries around the world. About 
50,000 researchers worldwide use 
synchrotron facilities for their work.
SESAME is an intergovernmental 
centre with eight Member countries: 
Cyprus, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, 
Pakistan, Palestine and Turkey. Observer 
countries include Brazil, Canada, China, 
the countries of the European Union, 
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, 
Kuwait, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States. CERN, the European 
Organization for Nuclear Research, 
on which the centre is institutionally 
modelled, is also an observer. The total 
cost of the project, as of May 2017, 
is nearly $90 million.
The SESAME centre is a remarkable 
achievement for several reasons. First, 
it marks a return to the exact sciences 
in the Middle East, after a long absence 
stretching back to the thirteenth century. 
It enables a ray of hope in this region, 
recently marked by chaos, political 
conflicts, terrorism and economic gloom. 
Scientific research, cooperation and 
joint achievements can now claim the 
spotlight again.
An exceptional 
success story
Let us begin with a scientific fact: at 
99 degrees, water is hot; it does not 
boil or produce steam until it reaches 
100 degrees. This steam is used to 
power trains and factories, which 
laid the foundations of the Industrial 
Revolution. One little degree extra 
made all the difference and led to a 
massive revolution.
The same principle governs our lives – 
success alone is not enough; a further 
degree of performance is needed to make 
a real change and achieve excellence. 
In the traditional equation, success comes 
from a mix of patience, good preparation 
and determination. But in the merciless 
context of competition for scientific 
excellence, it also needs something extra 
– creativity, or the ability to go beyond 
the ordinary. It is this degree that makes 
the difference between work that is 
satisfactory and work that is excellent.
That is the story of the SESAME 
synchrotron. From the moment the idea 
first entered the minds of the researchers 
who supported this dream, they put their 
energies into its realization, every step 
of the way. They raised the necessary 
funding, built the infrastructure, trained 
staff, developed work plans and carried 
them out – right until the day of the 
inauguration. Without these extra 
steps taken by all the participants, from 
individuals to States and institutions, this 
pioneering scientific achievement would 
never have been completed.
From the time they realized that the 
Middle East needed its own advanced 
research centre, the scientists started 
working in earnest to make it happen. 
In 1997, Herman Winick of the SLAC 
National Accelerator Laboratory 
(operated by Stanford University for 
the US Department of Energy Office 
of Science) in California, United States, 
and Gustav-Adolf Voss (1929-2013) 
of Germany’s Deutsches Elektronen-
Synchrotron (DESY) Research Centre, 
suggested that the German Bessy I 
accelerator, when it was decommissioned 
in 1999, be donated to provide the 
nucleus of an electronic accelerator in the 
Middle East. 
This proposal was enthusiastically 
received by the scientific community. 
The director of the Middle East Scientific 
Cooperation group, Sergio Fubini (1928-
2005) and Herwig Schopper, a former 
director-general of CERN, proposed the 
project to the German government. 
The government agreed, once UNESCO 
provided the assurance that SESAME 
would be established under the 
auspices of the Organization, and that 
the financing of dismantling the facility 
and its transportation from Germany to 
Jordan would be taken care of.

UNESCO launched the project in 1999. 
Three years later, the Organization 
officially announced that the accelerator 
would be built under its auspices, as 
the project served its own objectives 
– namely, to reinforce security, peace 
and international cooperation through 
education, culture and science.
Divisions give way 
to humanism
Under the leadership of the then 
president of the SESAME council, Chris 
Llewellyn Smith, and the centre’s director, 
Khaled Toukan, seeing SESAME through 
to completion has required a continuous 
effort by all those involved – including 
participating countries, observers and 
donors – from the start of construction 
work in 2003 to the inauguration in 2017. 
Jordan donated the land and covered 
the cost of construction of the 
building. The International Atomic 
Energy Authority (IAEA) offered 
specialized high-level training and 
scholarships for researchers and staff. 
The European Union provided funding 
worth $18 million. CERN shared its 
wealth of experience during the 
construction of the magnetic system 
for SESAME’s storage ring. Other 
partners – organizations, States, and 
synchrotron centres around the world 
– provided advice and expertise, plans 
and equipment; perfectly illustrating 
the spirit of solidarity, cooperation, 
generosity and creativity.
On 16 May 2017, inauguration day, there 
was an atmosphere of joy, enthusiasm, 
pride and optimism – but it was also 
tinged with apprehension. Had all 
the obstacles encountered during 
fourteen years of hard work really been 
overcome? The answer could only be 
positive – yes, science has the power 
to unite and transcend divisions in the 
service of humanity.
Powered by 
solar energy
The SESAME synchrotron centre does 
not just owe its exceptional character to 
the fact that it is the first in the Middle 
East, or that it has succeeded in getting 
citizens interested in science while they 
were preoccupied with the ongoing 
conflicts in the region. It is also the first 
science laboratory anywhere in the 
world to be powered by solar energy.
Besides, SESAME has benefited around 
750 researchers and engineers in 
the Middle East, who have followed 
specialized training courses in research 
centres and laboratories in countries 
that are considered to be scientifically 
advanced. In this way, the centre helps 
to safeguard the scientific capital of the 
region, while curbing the brain drain 
and strengthening the participation 
of these researchers in the scientific 
and economic development of their 
respective countries. 
It has helped raise the level of scientific 
teaching and research in universities 
and research centres in the region, 
by building their scientific capacities, 
multiplying the number of active 
research projects − all at a low cost. 
The centre also serves as a bridge 
between the cultures of East and West 
and North and South, over and above 
strictly scientific matters.
The centre has received fifty-five 
proposals in response to its first call for 
applications for the use of its beamlines. 
Researchers from the region will now 
be able to make discoveries in scientific 
areas as varied as the early diagnosis and 
treatment of illnesses; the identification 
of plant diseases to save crops, and the 
analyses of ancient manuscripts without 
damaging them. 
Some challenges still need to be 
overcome, however. These include 
the further development of a user 
community, the development of 
new radiation packages, and the 
consolidation of the centre’s facilities, 
including an administration building. 
The running costs for the centre also 
need funding. But none of these 
challenges will discourage those who 
believe in the project and its objectives, 
as it represents both a victory for science 
and the embodiment of the idea of a 
common world and humanity.
A journalist and communications expert, 
Anoud Al‑Zou’bi (Jordan) is a specialist 
in audio-visual information. She is also 
a producer and presenter of several 
programmes on Jordanian national 
television, and was awarded the Cairo 
Arab Media Festival gold medal in 2014.
Gihan Kamel, a researcher at SESAME, 
analyses particles at 
the infrared beamline lab. 
