He was named after Giuseppe 
Arcimboldo (1527-1593), the Italian 
Renaissance painter who was famous for 
his portraits of faces made up of flowers, 
fruits, plants and animals. “His paintings 
tell us that, with intelligence, talent, and 
lots of fruit and vegetables, we can solve 
everything,” explains biochemist Pablo 
Zamora, co-founder of NotCo, along with 
Matías Muchnick and Karim Pichara.
Our Giuseppe’s passion is not painting, 
but cooking. To find the right recipe, this 
intelligent chef searches a database of 
plants – to identify which foods need to 
be combined, and in what proportions – 
to produce the desired taste and texture 
of the food being substituted. 
“He finds unusual links between plants 
that he has previously classified at a 
molecular, nutritional, sensorial and 
physiochemical level,” explains Zamora, 
who attended the Netexplo Forum 
2018, held in February at UNESCO 
Headquarters in Paris.
Luckily, Giuseppe is not the only one in 
the kitchen. He is supported by a team 
of scientists and chefs who fine-tune the 
recipes. “He sometimes makes mistakes,” 
Zamora admits. “He can make milk that 
tastes perfect, except it’s pink! So the 
team tells Giuseppe there’s a problem and 
he reformulates the algorithm to get the 
right colour.” 

Chef Giuseppe heralds a new
culinary era 
Karim Pichara, Matías Muchnick 
and Pablo Zamora, 
founders of The Not Company.
Beatriz Juez 
Giuseppe could radically 
change our eating habits. But 
this futuristic master chef is 
only an algorithm! He was 
created by The Not Company 
(NotCo), a startup founded 
in Santiago by three young 
Chileans in 2015. With the aid of 
artificial intelligence (AI), they 
produce substitutes of popular 
animal-based foods, using only 
plant-based ingredients to 
reconstitute not just the taste, 
but also the colour, texture and 
nutrients. For his innovation, 
Giuseppe was named one of 
the ten laureates of Netexplo 
Innovation 2018.
Giuseppe never ceases to surprise with 
his combinations of ingredients, which no 
human could think up. “For mayonnaise, 
we use lupines, which, mixed with 
certain chickpea components, makes 
an emulsion very close to that of eggs. 
Mushrooms are used to heighten the 
sensation of sweetness in chocolate and 
canary grass seeds to alter the density of 
certain milks.” 
NotCo is on a mission to revolutionize 
the food industry by crafting and 
marketing healthy and tasty foods 
obtained from plants, at an affordable 
price and produced without harming 
the environment. According to Zamora, 
eighty-five per cent of their clients are 
neither vegan nor vegetarian – they buy 
NotCo’s cutting-edge products because 
they like them and because they are 
healthy and good for the environment. 
It is indeed the beginning of a new era of 
food: the idea is to “change the way we 
make the foods that we love eating, not 
change the foods we eat.” 
Vegetable mayonnaise 
The company’s Not Mayo vegetable 
seasoning that resembles mayonnaise – 
but without GMOs, lactose, gluten, eggs 
or soya – is already on the Chilean market. 
Other products – yogurt, milk, cheese, 
chocolate and cereals – will be launched 
soon. NotCo also plans to expand to 
Argentina, Brazil and Colombia in the 
near future.
The biochemist is convinced that the 
application of artificial intelligence 
to food will contribute to sustainable 
development. The food industry needs 
to transform its production methods, 
he says, reminding us that 1,500 litres 
of water are needed to produce a kilo 
of wheat and ten times that amount to 
produce a kilo of meat, according to the 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 
