The right to information is a natural 
extension of the right to education, and 
that very fact makes it possible to define 
its concrete content.
That content is sometimes defined as 
“facts” or raw news, i.e., news that is not 
interpreted. There should be no illusion 
about the practical value of the traditional 
distinction between fact and opinion. 



René Maheu 
“The same is true of the right to 
information as of all other rights: 
its legitimate content must be 
defined in terms of real needs,” 
wrote the French philosopher 
René Maheu (1905‑1975), 
adding: “Conditionally, of 
course, on the word 'needs' 
being understood to mean the 
needs of human development, 
and not of self‑interest or 
passion.” This is an excerpt of 
his contribution to UNESCO’s 
survey on the philosophical 
foundations of human rights, 
which he submitted on 
30 June 1947, under the title 
“Right to Information and to 
the Expression of Opinion”. 
Information as the means of 
free thought
For, in your tongue, I cannot fit, 
an installation by Indian artist 
Shilpa Gupta at the YARAT 
Contemporary Art Space in Baku, 
Azerbaijan, 2018.
The inclusion of the right to information 
among the Rights of Man means 
more than seeking a mere increase 
or improvement in the knowledge 
available to the public. It involves a 
radical reconsideration of the function of 
information. It means that the products, 
the methods, and even the organization 
of the news industry must be reassessed 
from the point of view not of the interests 
or prejudices of those who control its 
production, but of the human dignity 
of those who henceforth are justified in 
expecting of it the means of free thought.
From the moment that information 
comes to be regarded as one of the rights 
of man, the structures and practices 
which make of it an instrument for the 
exploitation, by alienation, of the minds 
of the masses, for money or for power, 
can no longer be tolerated; information 
becomes, for those who impart it, a social 
function in the service of intellectual 
emancipation.

What is a fact? A piece of evidence. 
And the selection of a fact is an implicit 
expression of opinion. There is nothing 
more misleading than the chimera of 
mechanical objectivity. Nor can human 
liberty look for salvation to the impersonal.
A better definition of information would 
probably be a detached presentation of 
materials capable of use by anybody in 
the formation of an opinion. Whereas 
an expression of opinion – whether 
persuasive or challenging – is always 
militant, the characteristic of information, 
unlike propaganda or publicity, which 
proceeds by obsession, is availability.
This being so, it will be asked whether a 
corollary of the recognition of man’s right 
to information is not an admission of 
the right of all to access to all sources of 
knowledge in all circumstances. Leaving 
out of account questions of physical 
impossibility, this straightaway suggests 
to the mind the many restrictions 
imposed for the protection of the most 
legitimate political, economic or personal 
interests: secrets of State, manufacturing 
secrets, domestic privacy.
A realistic appreciation 
of relativity
But the proclamation of the right to 
education does not ipso facto mean that 
the child has a right to learn anything, 
at any age, and anyhow. It only means 
that it is the duty of adults to give the 
child the knowledge necessary for his 
development in the light of his needs 
(and capabilities) at his age. A right is no 
more than an instrument – an instrument 
for building up man in man’s mind. And 
an instrument is only an instrument if it is 
related to needs.
The same is true of the right to information 
as of all other rights: its legitimate content 
must be defined in terms of real needs. 
Conditionally, of course, on the word 
‘needs’ being understood to mean the 
needs of human development, and not of 
self-interest or passion.
Of their very nature, those needs involve 
a large measure of recourse to human 
fraternity and to exchanges between 
men, an appeal that will always extend far 
beyond mere egotism. It is true, however, 
that, as there are great variations in living 
conditions and modes of development, the 
needs of human groups are not identical at 
all points in time and space. These groups 
do not all need the same information.
There must be no fear of introducing into 
a consideration of the rights of man this 
element of historical and sociological 
relativity. So far from putting in peril the 
effective achievement of those rights, 
only a realistic appreciation in the light 
of that relativity can give them concrete 
meaning for the men who must fight to 
make them triumph.
The right to the expression of opinion 
is much more closely geared to historic 
relativity. While the right to information 
must be numbered among the conditions 
of democracy and thus has the force of 
a principle, the right to the expression 
of opinion is part of the exercise of 
democracy and, as such, shares the 
relativity of all political realities or practice. 
A regime blessed with stable institutions 
and with a body of citizens apathetic or 
tolerant or whose critical faculties are 
highly trained, can give the freest rein to 
the expression of individual views. Indeed 
it must do so, in the sense that, more than 
any other, it needs that indispensable 
stimulus to maintain progress.
Against this, a democratic order in peril in 
a State torn by passion or possessed of the 
devils of credulity or, again, a democracy 
fully committed to a revolutionary or 
systematic process of reconstruction, 
is justified in imposing considerable 
limitation on the freedom of individual 
expression, the exercise of which is 
necessarily hostile to complete unity. 
Recognition that the right to the 
expression of opinion must be 
conditioned by the historical perspective 
of a particular democracy, is not 
sacrificing a human right to reason 
of State. On the contrary, that right is 
thus given its full meaning by refusal to 
sacrifice to an abstract concept the merits 
and chances of success of a concrete 
undertaking. [...]
French philosopher René Maheu 
(1905-1975) joined the staff of UNESCO 
when it was set up in 1946, and went 
on to serve two consecutive six-year 
terms (from 1962 to 1974) as Director-
General of the Organization. He was head 
of UNESCO’s Free Flow of Information 
division at the time he submitted this text. 
