Aquí Estoy (Here I am, mixed media, 2014), 
by Cuban artist Juan Roberto Diago

We humans are therefore influenced, in 
a sense, by the very principle that nails 
us to the ground.
This idea of influence – passing from a 
cosmogonic, or mythical, conception, to 
a cosmological, or scientific, conception, 
and passing from astrology to astronomy 
– was revisited in the nineteenth century 
by the Bonapartist scholar, Pierre-Simon 
de Laplace, in the form of mechanical 
determinism. This determinism is 
illustrated by this famous sentence from 
his philosophical essay on probabilities: 
“We ought then to regard the present 
state of the universe as the effect of its 
anterior state and as the cause of the one 
which is to follow. Given for one instant, 
an intelligence which could comprehend 
all the forces by which nature is 
animated and the respective positions 
of the beings which compose it – an 
intelligence sufficiently vast to submit 
this data to analysis – it would embrace 
in the same formula the movements of 
the greatest bodies in the universe and 
those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing 
would be uncertain, and the future, as 
the past, would be present to its eyes.” 
In other words, we believe that we are 
free and autonomous subjects, even 
though we are the objects of the events 
that preceded us, and therefore remain 
under their influence.
But then, is it the effect of chance, or of an 
epistemological and ideological moment, 
that during the reign of Napoleon 
(1804-1815), and at the very moment 
when he restored slavery and deployed 
intensive colonization, other scholars, like 
George Cuvier, seize this deterministic 
conception, adopt it by applying it to 
the notion of human races, thus creating 
a scientific racism, in which scholars 
with dire reputations – like Gobineau, 
Friedrich Blumenbach, Houston Stewart 
Chamberlain and Vacher de Lapouge – 
engulfed themselves? 



Dancing the
unspeakable 
or the question of how the memory of slavery 
influences contemporary artistic creation 
Alain Foix
The artist Alain Foix takes 
a philosophical look at the 
relationship between history, 
memory and artistic creation. 
Thanks to his art, the artist is not 
assigned a skin colour and not 
irredeemably condemned to 
dance an unspeakable history. 
Instead, he is part of a dialectic: 
he is both free and possessed. By 
creating, he becomes the master 
of his own history, which allows 
him to overcome the past. His 
artistic intelligence must be 
seen as a “ruse” that produces 
a new influence on the world 
and, by creating an open and 
indeterminate work, encourages 
the sharing of cultures.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks the International Day for the 
Remembrance of the Slave Trade 
and its Abolition, on 23 August. 
Its first commemoration took 
place twenty years ago, in 1998, in 
honour of the 1791 insurrection in 
Santo Domingo (now Haiti and the 
Dominican Republic), which played 
a decisive role in the abolition of 
the transatlantic slave trade.
Influence: “the action by which a fluid 
flows from the stars, which is supposed 
to act on human destiny”. That was the 
original meaning of the word. According 
to the theory of universal gravitation, the 
stars exert an influence on each other 
according to their respective masses, and 
this influence is produced by gravitational 
waves which, in a certain way, correspond 
to the fluid of the Ancients.

All of them confined these races in 
the historical determination of their 
constitutions.
And if “God does not play dice with 
the universe”, to use Einstein's famous 
quote, there would be, in the order of 
this universal harmony, a logic in things 
– according to which there would be 
the chosen and the damned, visible 
and scientifically identifiable by their 
morphology. We know that it was such 
mechanistic thinking that encouraged 
the brutal mechanics of the industrial 
expansion of slavery.
Mi historia es tu historia (My history 
is your history, mixed media, 2000), by 
Cuban artist Juan Roberto Diago.


Unfortunately, long after the abolition 
of slavery, and in spite of the progress 
of science in all fields of biology, 
anthropology and hard sciences like 
physics and astrophysics, this conception 
endures in our minds even today, and 
filters our cultural background. Have we 
not heard, on television and in the media, 
about the “curse of the Haitian people”, 
following the earthquake that struck Haiti 
in 2010 – thus associating a theological 
thought with a tectonic phenomenon 
linked to economic, political and social 
causes? As if the event remained under 
the influence of a past coming from 
some primal condition, whose cause is 
age-old. This obviously makes it possible 
not to take into account the colonial issue 
and the political and economic history 
which controls the destiny of this island 
even today.
Let us be wary, then, of the notion of 
influence, which, like a double-edged 
sword can wound those who wield it. 
Because not being wary could lead to this 
return of meaning that would imply we 
are determined – condemned to paint, 
dance, sing, play and film to infinity, this 
backdrop that constitutes the residual 
memory of the inhuman deflagration that 
made us what we are. Condemned to 
dance the unspeakable.
So let us be careful not to adopt this 
determinist and racist conception of 
human beings, to the point of making 
those among us who are capable of 
artistic expression – the storytellers and 
painters – the prisoners of our history. 
For a non-deterministic 
history
Because the history of slavery is not 
our Big Bang – that first moment from 
which everything flows mechanically and 
irreversibly – because there is a past, that 
is the pre-colonial history of Africa and 
the Americas. And something beyond: 
the future to be built. Science and new 
conceptions of history have allowed us 
to discard this dangerous mechanical 
determinism and its conception 
of influence.
In the middle of the last century, Werner 
Heisenberg introduced the notion 
of indeterminacy, or the uncertainty 
principle, into quantum physics. It means 
that an object is never anything but an 
object for a subject, and the subject 
who observes, separated ontologically 
from the observed object, cannot grasp 
it without knowing that he exerts an 
influence on it and he must take this 
influence into account. There is therefore 
no absolute and determined object, nor 
absolute subject, but a relationship. A 
relationship induced by the action, the 
movement, the thought of the subject 
himself in his relation to the object.
But what would be the nature of this 
relationship, of this influence, if the 
subject himself were determined, under 
the influence of a cause preceding him? 
It would simply be non-existent and 
understandable only in a mathematical 
equation. The principle of indeterminacy – 
which supposes a new, non-deterministic 
mode between us and our universe – 
therefore implies that the subject himself is 
indeterminate, that his action and thought 
are not subject to mechanical causality. In 
other words, the subject is free, in motion, 
in progress. And therefore he releases the 
object from himself. The object, through 
this dialectical indeterminacy of the 
relationship, regains its autonomy.

Beyond memory, 
being the subject of 
one's own history
This freedom is, in fact, that of our action 
within our own history. A history of which 
we are no longer the thinking objects, 
but the acting subjects. Although we are 
acting ourselves, by our own actions. No 
longer objects of a history that compels 
us to think through it, but subjects of a 
history that is built with us and by us.
We must therefore think of history, our 
history, no longer through the framework 
of the determinists, but with Hegel 
and his conception of the subject of 
history. Hegel, whose famous dialectic 
of the master and the slave is simply an 
illustration of the consequences of taking 
possession of one’s own history by the 
subject who emancipates himself from it.
Our history and our memory influence 
us only to the extent that we ourselves 
influence it. From then on, this cosmic 
backdrop that is our memory is no longer 
our only horizon. We escape from this 
black hole to discover its relativity. We 
escape it to become ourselves, to create 
a new time that is none other than ours. 
This time of my being, of my action, 
which is none other than myself. I am 
time in action. I am its expression.
Scene from Revelations, the signature 
work of African-American dancer and 
choreographer Alvin Ailey (1931-1989).  

This trap, this cosmic net that could 
become my memory, closes in on the 
person I no longer am. It closes on a past 
history, put into perspective. A history 
that is now mine, that belongs to me, 
but of which I am no longer a prisoner. 
I become master of my history, because 
I have opened its horizon. Torn its net.
I am no longer condemned to dance the 
unspeakable, because as master of my time, 
master of myself, I am also master of my 
choices and my expression. I am a free and 
autonomous subject, emancipated from 
my memory, and my expression cannot be 
read and acted only through the prism of 
my past, whether individual or collective. 
I have opened the field of possibilities.
In other words, there is no moral or 
intellectual obligation for a black artist to 
paint the blackness of his history, since 
he is a free and autonomous subject and 
recognized as such.
The artist, whoever he may be, can no 
longer be considered the instrument 
of expression of a sponsor who would 
be his master – master of a subject to 
be depicted and expressed, master of 
a history and a cosmogony, master of 
an ethic and an aesthetic, master of a 
vision and a conception of the world 
bequeathed by a history of which 
we are prisoners – but as the acting 
subject, autonomous and free in his own 
expression, his own vision of the world, 
his own history. 
It is then necessary for us to reconsider his 
work differently, through other aesthetic, 
ethical and political prisms. Given this 
freedom acquired over the determinisms 
of history, we must grasp the work of 
every artist, not as a forced expression 
of himself and his memory, but as the 
expression of a deliberate act, to which 
he gives meaning and existence.
The dialectic of 
the artist and his work
We can then perceive the artist in the 
dialectical order of a subject vis-à-vis 
his work, in the subject/object dialectic. 
This work is a differentiated expression, it 
expresses a differance – and we write this 
word with an a as Derrida does, because 
it is the act of differing, of coming out of 
oneself, of one's own time; something 
that is not oneself, or not entirely oneself. 
An expressive distance from oneself. 
The act of artistic creation is therefore 
critical because it expresses a crisis. Krisis 
in Greek means “separation, distinction”. 
But crisis also means, originally in French, 
“a decision, a choice”. This crisis is the 
dialectical moment of giving birth to 
something that comes from oneself, 
but is not self. This differance is an 
offering of oneself to what is not self, to 
the other. It produces an object, but a 
subjective object. What is meaningful 
in the work is that gift, which opens the 
possibility of sharing between the other 
and oneself – it is in this sharing that 
expression is found. In this relationship 
between subjects through a subjective 
object, which by nature engages a silent 
dialogue between the two.
Thus, because it is freely chosen by the 
autonomous subject who presents it to 
be seen, makes it a gift and an object 
of sharing with the other-spectator, the 
work itself acquires its autonomy, its own 
meaning, even its enigmatic quality, its 
indeterminacy, and can become an object 
of comprehension and understanding, 
differentiated from its author. This is why 
some authors can say that once the work 
is created, it no longer belongs to them – 
it is offered in its entirety to the universal 
of aesthetic input.
The artist, both free 
and influenced
It is precisely this established freedom that 
gives value to the gift, to the artist’s offering 
of his work. It gives him the capacity 
to create, literally – that is, to produce 
something new from the old, to generate 
mutations of form. It is by reformulating 
material, namely a history sedimented in 
cultural, aesthetic or even ethical memory, 
that he produces meaning.
If an artist does so, it is because he is able, 
by choice, to bring his own liberated, 
autonomous energy to the residual 
memory that constitutes culture. His 
energy is his formal action, his power to 
work, in the sense that Aristotle defines 
the word energeia (literally “that which is 
fully at work”, but also “that which gives 
form, that does the work”) – form and 
energy being the same thing in reality, as 
physics attests.
We can thus say, starting from this 
energeia, that the artist is an oddball, a 
being possessed, one who is “worked” 
on. One could also say, starting from the 
verb energeio, that he is influenced. But 
then, how can the artist be simultaneously 
free, autonomous, emancipated 
and influenced? This is an apparent 
contradiction, resolved by the simple fact 
that the artist is an artist, free to choose his 
influence, free to let himself be possessed 
and be worked on by a dimension of 
the collective memory that he makes his 
own. And it is at this price, because he 
is free, that he can impose his own form 
and possess what possesses him, overlap 
what overlaps him. This choice is precisely 
what, in the Sartrean sense, can be called a 
commitment. He engages himself entirely 
in his chosen material; he takes the risk 
because this material possesses him. And 
if he is possessed by it, it is because he 
perceives in himself a necessity, a lack that 
he needs to fill.
This is how we must consider the residual 
memory of the history of slavery: as 
material for the artist who wants to 
grapple with it.
What the artist will produce from his 
work is what Aristotle calls entelechy 
(from entelecheia, the realization or 
complete expression of some function). 
A finality of form, in a way, produced by 
the energy-form of the artist who gives 
the work its autonomy. 

But the work, which is not him, but 
which has emerged from him, remains 
a question, a form questioning the very 
enigma of history, questioning also this 
present in which this memory subsists.
So isn’t this work, which “journeys to its 
end” the act of this oddball who seeks to 
put an end to this memory inside him, 
to end this history with a new form that 
illuminates the past while leaving it in its 
place, by literally going beyond it?
A ruse of artistic 
intelligence
Thus the artist chooses his influence by 
exercising his artistic freedom precisely in 
order not to remain under the influence 
of the past and to produce the present 
instead. When we speak, for example, of 
the influence of African art or art nègre, on 
modern art – on Picasso, Braque, Derain, 
Matisse, even Apollinaire and the Surrealists 
– it means understanding it, not as the 
mechanical influence of an object on a 
subject, but as a relational dialogue. This 
influence arises because the artists were 
in a critical phase, questioning the forms 
inherited from their past and in search of 
new expressive materials. Thus Picasso's 
painting, Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, is the 
fruit of a dialogue between a question of 
the West about its own aesthetics at a given 
moment, and African art, that we then 
discover is not “primitive” as described by 
some, but a bearer of creation and thought. 
This inspires Maillol to say that “Art nègre 
contains more ideas than Greek art”. This 
encounter therefore produces both new 
forms of expression and a fresh perspective 
on the object that introduces a new 
aesthetic dialogue: in this case, African art.
What is called influence is in fact a choice 
dictated by a need for expression. And 
in this expression, there is an overlap 
between the subject and the object, 
there is possession. We can say in this 
sense that Les Demoiselles d'Avignon 
is possessed by African art. The work 
is the product of the search for a new 
perspective, a transformation of taste, 
or as Nietzsche would say about music, 
“a renaissance in the art of listening”. He 
was captivated by Bizet's Carmen, a work 
in which he found an African dimension. 
He was fascinated by it because an 
encounter takes place between the 
opera and the philosopher who, having 
separated himself from Romanticism 
and Wagner, sought a meaningful new 
aesthetic form that opened new horizons.
To speak of influence is in fact to speak 
of a search for new forms, new formal 
contents, capable of transforming our 
way of seeing, hearing and appreciating. 
This is a fight. Artistic creation is more 
than resistance – it is a “combat sport” 
against modes of perceiving the world 
and its objects that are sedimented and 
imposed by a dominant culture. When 
Martin Luther King said that “music is our 
weapon of war” he meant just that. This 
weapon is effective not only because it 
gathers forces around it, but also because 
it is able to enter the sensibility of the 
adversary and possess it. It speaks to him 
(the adversary) and, through sensibility, 
opens horizons. This is possible because 
gospel and blues in the United States 
are part of a common foundation, which 
allows blacks to speak to whites through 
a form of sound that opens the mind 
to the content of their speech. Even the 
speeches of the civil rights leader were 
chanted in the manner of gospel songs 
– which gave them greater penetration, 
and carried them towards a universal. He 
spoke in his speeches, of course, of the 
common memory of slavery, but in a form 
that created distance from it, to speak to 
his contemporaries.
In dance, Katherine Dunham and after 
her, Lester Horton and Alvin Ailey, drew 
elements from African or Indian traditions 
and from the memory of slavery, and 
incorporated these in their creation. 
It was part of a search for new forms 
that could both illuminate the past and 
produce a new perspective. Jazz was 
born in Congo Square, a place for slaves 
to meet and dance in New Orleans in 
the US, to integrate the constituent 
elements of their memory into a new 
musical form. But it was a memory 
distanced by the form itself, and 
creating an area for a sensitive 
exchange between several forms of 
culture, several horizons.
We can then speak of a ruse of the artistic 
intelligence that integrates the old into 
the new, by going beyond the past, 
and enabling it to influence 
the way it is perceived. This is 
undoubtedly the meaning 
of métissage, hybridization 
– a movement towards 
the new that creates 
a new influence. The 
goddess Metis, the first 
wife of Zeus, whose name 
literally means “advice, 
ruse”, of whom Hesiod said 
“she knows more than any 
god or mortal man”, was able 
to influence Zeus and make him 
change his mind.
Thus the integration of memory, 
whether of slavery or any other 
memory, into a new body and a new 
form, is a ruse of artistic intelligence to 
influence the present.
Héxadécimal, mixed media, 2015, 
by Chichi Reyes, Dominican Republic.

Voyage (350 x 300 x 300 cm), an assemblage of flip-
flops and Yoruba figurines (ibejis) evoking the slave 
trade, by Beninese artist Dominique Zinkpé, 2015.
Today’s art scene is teeming with 
examples of this in dance, music, theatre, 
art and cinema. This ruse is possible 
only as long as we accept that the 
artist has freed himself from his past 
by integrating it into his work – that, 
as a free and autonomous subject, he 
chooses this influence and is not its 
object. This also forces us to see the artist 
and his work as ontologically separate, 
although related in a certain way, chosen 
by the artist and his mode of action on 
the material of memory. It also means 
that we must look at the work as a work 
in its autonomy and in the enigma of 
its indeterminacy. It remains open, 
an object of sharing and therefore of 
differentiated judgements, of criticism.
Finally, starting from the work itself, we 
cannot induce the colour of its author. 
Do not confine the painter in his colour 
because it is not the colour of the painter 
that gives colour to his work – it is the 
work itself and the critical analyses it 
later inspires. This work that says, in 
the variety of its possibilities and in the 
infinite possibilities of its open form 
and its interpretation, what Lamartine 
said, fighting against the abomination 
of slavery: "I am the colour of those 
who are persecuted.”
A writer, playwright, director and philosopher from Guadeloupe, Alain Foix is 
the founder of Quai des Arts, a multidisciplinary company that combines live 
performance with new technologies of image and sound. He is the author of 
several books, including Je danse donc je suis (I dance therefore I am, 2007); Histoires 
de l’esclavage racontées à Marianne (Stories of slavery told to Marianne, 2007); Noir : 
de Toussaint Louverture à Barack Obama (Black: from Toussaint Louverture to Barack 
Obama, 2009); Martin Luther King (2012) and Che Guevara (2015). His theatrical works 
include Vénus et Adam (2004), Pas de prison pour le vent (No prison for the wind, 
2006) and La dernière scène (The last scene, 2012), a private conversation between 
Martin Luther King, his wife Coretta and American activist Mumia Abu-Jamal.
