Aerial photograph documenting 
deforestation in the northern 
area of Pará State, Brazil (2013). 
According to the French newspaper 
Le Monde, Brazil reduced 
deforestation by 84 per cent between 
2004 and 2012 before it started 
to increase again. 
They proposed that the beginning of 
this new epoch should be symbolically set 
at 1784, the year in which Scottish inventor 
James Watt substantially improved upon 
the steam engine with new inventions 
– it also corresponded to the beginning 
of the Industrial Revolution and the use 
of fossil fuels.
 From 1987 to 2015, a vast, 
multidisciplinary research project, 
the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Programme (IGBP), collected a mass 
of data on anthropogenic changes 
to the Earth system. 
Other research, started in the 1950s 
and based on samples of ancient ice 
from the Antarctic and the present 
composition of the atmosphere 
– analysed at the Mauna Loa observatory 
in Hawaii, United States – have revealed 
an accelerated build-up of greenhouse 
gases (GHG), essentially carbon dioxide 
(CO2). In 1987, the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) was set up to 
evaluate the impact of these phenomena 
on climate.
The Great Acceleration
By pooling this data, in 2009 and again 
in 2015, environmental scientists Johan 
Rockström (Sweden), Will Steffen (US) 
and their colleagues at the Stockholm 
Resilience Centre drew up a list of the nine 
planetary boundaries that it would be 
dangerous to cross. 
Liz-Rejane Issberner and Philippe Léna
The term Anthropocene 
was coined to take into 
account the impact of the 
accelerated accumulation of 
greenhouse gases on climate 
and biodiversity, and also 
the irreversible damage caused 
by the over-consumption of 
natural resources. But do we 
need to turn this into a new 
geological epoch? While the 
debate continues among 
scientists, solutions have yet 
to be found. We are, in effect, 
witnessing a collective form of 
denial – the result of a naive 
faith in progress, consumerist 
ideology and powerful 
economic lobbies.
The term Anthropocene appears in 
the titles of hundreds of books and 
scientific articles and in thousands 
of citations. Its use in the media also 
continues to grow. Defining Earth’s 
most recent geological epoch in which 
human actions have started to provoke 
biophysical changes on a planetary scale, 
the word was coined in the 1980s by 
American biologist Eugene F. Stoermer 
and popularized in the early 2000s by 
Paul Crutzen, the Dutch atmospheric 
scientist and winner of the Nobel Prize 
in Chemistry 1995. The scientists noticed 
that these changes were leading the Earth 
system away from the relative equilibrium 
it had known since the beginning of the 
Holocene, 11,700 years ago. 
Anthropocene:
 the vital challenges of a scientific debate

Four of these boundaries have already 
been crossed – climate change, 
vegetation cover, biodiversity loss and 
extinctions (the Sixth Extinction) and 
biogeochemical flows – with phosphorus 
and nitrogen cycles playing a particularly 
crucial role. They also showed that all 
available indicators on the consumption 
of primary resources, energy use, 
population growth, economic activity 
and biosphere degradation, skyrocketed 
after the Second World War. This period 
was dubbed the Great Acceleration. 
Other observers have even spoken, 
since the 1970s, of a period of hyper-
acceleration. These trends are believed 
to be unsustainable. 
Metaphor or real 
geological epoch?
There seems to be a consensus that several 
parameters of the Earth system have recently 
started to develop beyond the spectrum 
of the natural variability of the Holocene 
– it is now more or less accepted that 
the term Anthropocene be used, to specify 
changes that are of human origin. A handful 
of scientists have nevertheless decided to go 
beyond using the term metaphorically or as 
a practical, interdisciplinary reference tool. 
They have proposed that the Anthropocene, 
just like the Holocene and the Pleistocene, 
should be elevated officially to the rank of 
geological epoch. 
An Anthropocene Working Group (AWG) 
has been set up to present this proposal 
to the International Union of Geological 
Sciences (IUGS). But for a new epoch to be 
named by stratigraphers, there has to be 
an observable and universal rift between 
the sedimentary layers of two epochs. 
Although the presence of anthropogenic 
carbon has been noted in sediments 
since the 1850s, this is not considered 
to be sufficient. 
After all, who’s responsible for crossing 
the biogeophysical boundaries if not 
Western humans and a particular 
socio-economic system? This has 
led to several alternative proposals – 
Occidentalocene, etc. Others, such as 
specialists in global or environmental 
history, feel that there is no ontological 
discontinuity and that the exceptional 
nature of Western growth 
(the Great Divergence) will have to be 
repositioned in the longer term.
According to them, humans have always 
– or at least for the last 40,000 years 
– had an increasing impact on their 
surroundings. They have contributed, 
for example, to the disappearance of 
American and Australian megafauna. 
Some  researchers are thus arguing for 
a long Anthropocene, with sub-periods, 
such  as capitalist industrialization 
(1850-1950) and the Great Acceleration. 
Most, though, recognize the need to 
abandon a linear and deterministic vision 
of historical time. 
The AWG is therefore suggesting that 
the change of epoch should be in 1950, 
the year in which various chemical 
constituents and plastic particles of 
anthropogenic origin began to appear in 
sediments. This is also the beginning of the 
Great Acceleration. In any event, a possible 
failure to recognize the Anthropocene 
as a geological epoch would in no way 
invalidate the scientific use of the term as 
it stands today.
The concept of the Anthropocene has 
sparked several controversies in spite of 
its brief existence – the term itself has been 
queried. Historians and anthropologists 
have questioned the reference to 
anthropos, the generic human being.  
Bad Dreams, part of a series by 
photographers Guillaume Bression and 
Carlos Ayesta in the no-go zone around 
Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power 
plant, in 2013. The artists, from France 
and Venezuela, chose to use transparent 
plastic to depict radiation, which is both 
invisible and odourless.

Since the end of the Second World War, 
several scientists have warned of the 
non-generalizable and unsustainable 
character of the Western economic model. 
No boundary had yet been crossed, 
and humankind had consumed less 
than one planet. But the process had 
been set in motion. In the early 1970s, 
the situation worsened, the warnings 
multiplied, and the scientific data 
accumulated. On both these occasions, 
a historical change of course would 
have been possible. It has become more 
difficult today.
Collective denial
Why are we refusing to see this? 
There could be a number of reasons: 
a blind faith in progress and development 
– in other words, in a system which 
increases available wealth indefinitely 
– and a belief in the capacity of science 
and technology to solve all problems 
and negative externalities (like pollution, 
for example); powerful interests that 
benefit from this process and carry out 
intense lobbying; the media takeover 
of the minds of consumers, creating 
a hunger for individual consumption, 
as much for comfort as to set oneself apart 
and be recognized.
It is surprising that the human and 
social sciences have avoided this issue 
for so long, given that it will determine 
the future of humanity. Besides being 
anthropocentric by definition, 
these disciplines believe that the 
field belongs to the natural sciences, 
par excellence. 
The emergence of the concept of 
the Anthropocene confers upon them 
the responsibility of explaining how human 
societies have been able to provoke changes 
of such magnitude to the modus operandi 
of the planet, and what differentiated 
impacts they will have on the world map. 
The social sciences and humanities should 
be developing and acquiring new subjects 
and knowledge to respond to the questions 
raised by this new epoch – including natural 
disasters, renewable energy, the depletion 
of natural resources, desertification, ecocide, 
widespread pollution, migration, social and 
environmental injustice.
The slow and feeble reactions of politicians 
– and of societies in general – to climate 
change, is also astounding. A mathematical 
analysis of networks of citations has shown 
that in scientific articles on the subject, 
there has been a consensus, since the 
early 1990s, that climate change exists. 
Given that the crisis is worsening, it is hard 
to understand why efforts to reduce GHGs 
have been so half-hearted. What obstacles 
are preventing international negotiations 
from being more effective? Besides the 
intentionality of these so-called obstacles, 
there is no doubt that communications 
between science and society are sluggish, 
at least when it comes to the climate 
question. To address this, the IPCC has 
adopted a new approach for its Sixth 
Assessment Report (AR6), designed to 
raise awareness among the general public, 
not just decision-makers.
Overcoming deadlocks
One of the stumbling blocks of the 
Anthropocene is that to tackle it, the 
delicate subject of environmental justice has 
to be addressed. Climate change will amplify 
the existing risks, and create new ones, 
for natural and human systems. Yet these 
risks are not distributed equally, generally 
affecting disadvantaged individuals and 
groups the most. But it is not easy to find 
a satisfactory solution to this problem, 
given the heterogeneity of countries in 
terms of their level of development, size, 
population, and natural resources, etc. 

WHERE? – No one wears a watch, 
a visual interpretation of the journeys 
plastics make, the time it takes for 
them to degrade, and their impact on 
the environment. It features plastic items 
collected from islands off the west coast 
of Scotland (United Kingdom).
It seems as though humanity is being 
lethargic – waiting for the end of the film, 
when the heroes arrive to sort everything 
out, and we can all live happily ever after.
Liz-Rejane Issberner (Brazil) is an 
economist and senior researcher at 
the Brazilian Institute of Information in 
Science and Technology (IBICT) and 
professor at the Postgraduate Programme 
in Information Science (IBICT with 
the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro).  
Philippe Léna (France), is a geographer 
and sociologist, and emeritus researcher 
at the French National Research Institute 
for Sustainable Development (IRD) 
and the National Museum of Natural 
History (MNHN), Paris. 

What’s more, the human ecological 
footprint has already overtaken, by fifty 
per cent, the planet’s capacity for 
regeneration and absorption, and eighty 
per cent of its population lives in countries 
whose biocapacity is already smaller 
than its ecological footprint. A country 
like Brazil (and other countries on the 
American continent) still possesses a 
large biocapacity surplus, even though 
it consumes 1.8 planets. But twenty-six 
per cent of its GHG emissions are due 
to deforestation. A significant part of its 
ecological footprint comes from exporting 
primary products, which is the reason for 
a large proportion of this deforestation. 
The competitive globalized system tries to 
find supplies at the least cost, encouraging 
extractivism in many countries, and land-
grabbing in others. 
Even if it were possible to suppress all 
carbon dioxide emissions in high-revenue 
countries right now, it would still not 
be enough to reduce the global carbon 
footprint and meet the limits imposed 
for the biosphere until 2050. In other 
words, in spite of the considerable 
differences in the size of their economies 
and their reserves of natural resources, 
all countries need to try to remedy 
the most pressing problem of the 
Anthropocene – by drastically reducing 
their GHG emissions. 
This is exactly what leads us to the 
deadlocks that usually arise in international 
negotiations – the search for culprits that 
then dissuades countries from making 
commitments, for fear of compromising 
their economic growth and their jobs, 
or antagonizing powerful interests. The 
solution that was reached in the Paris 
Agreement, signed on 22 April 2016, 
was to ask countries to make voluntary 
commitments, rather than impose criteria 
established on a planetary scale. This 
means each country commits to meet 
targets for reducing its emissions in line 
with what it considers to be viable.
This approach has helped to overcome 
deadlocks and to make action possible. 
But  it has also created a tangle of 
assessment criteria that complicates 
comparisons between national efforts. 
Also, in spite of its universal character, 
the Paris Agreement does not provide for 
sanctions against countries that default 
on their commitments. This is a sign of the 
weak governance of the climate question 
which, in the absence of an institution 
mandated to carry it out, is incapable of 
prevailing over the economic interests of 
countries and enterprises.
Submerged under contradictions, 
dilemmas and ignorance, the extremely 
serious environmental issues of the 
Anthropocene are not getting the 
required level of priority on national and 
social agendas. 
