These include cultural institutions, 
museums, civil-society groups, startups, 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
embassies and international organizations. 
Not surprisingly, about 150 libraries across 
Greece will implement several special 
programmes within the summer reading 
campaign, led by the National Library 
of Greece. 
Municipal programmes and organizations 
will also participate in the year’s activities 
– including the City’s Athens Culture 
Net and Open Schools, both funded by 
the Stavros Niarchos Foundation; 
Technopolis, the industrial museum and 
cultural complex; OPANDA, the Youth, 
Culture and Sports Organization, 
the civil-society platform SynAthina 
and refugee programmes.
One million visitors 
expected
The programme features a vivid patchwork 
of over 250 events and activities, 
all revolving around the world of books, 
learning and knowledge. With a million 
visitors expected, the city aspires 
to provide a literary backdrop to cater 
to all tastes and ages. 
Besides spreading a love for books 
and learning, it hopes to foster open 
dialogue − not only for the creators, 
stakeholders and the intellectual elite, 
but most importantly, for all its citizens. 
Books and reading are melded with art 
and  creativity, focusing on learning, 
but also exhibiting that books can bring 
joy and pleasure to readers. 
At a time when the country is going 
through financial hardships and the book 
industry is facing a crisis, financing 
the event has had its challenges. Even so, 
the City of Athens has allocated a budget 
of €500,000 for communications to 
support the event, and contribute to 
the book activities of OPANDA. Donations 
from institutions, sponsors, and embassies 
that will directly support the programme 
amounted to another €500,000 (at the end 
of February 2018) and was expected to 
increase. What surprised and motivated us 
was the interest and willingness of most 
participants to commit and undertake 
actions, using their own means to be a part 
of this very special event for the city.  
Anna Routsi (Greece) is an advisor to 
the Mayor of Athens for the programme 
and communication of Athens World 
Book Capital 2018.



Athens: Books everywhere
Anna Routsi
Athens, the Greek capital, 
kicks off a year-long 
celebration of reading, 
culture and knowledge as 
UNESCO’s World Book Capital 
2018, starting 23 April. 
“Books everywhere” is the motto 
this year, which means books 
and a feast of related activities 
are open to everyone, to be 
encountered and savoured in 
every corner of this historic city.
Le refuge (The Refuge), an installation at 
the Ivresse Livresque exhibition, Amboise, 
France, 2015.

Book lovers in Athens and those visiting 
it, are in for a treat. Proud of having been 
named World Book Capital for 2018, 
the ancient capital kicks off its global 
cultural event to celebrate books in myriad 
ways, in April 2018.
In preparation for the event, the City of 
Athens has worked hard to translate the 
vision of the Mayor of Athens, Georgios 
Kaminis, into reality. The aim of the mayor 
− and his team of seven people working on 
the event − has been to involve citizens of 
various social, ethnic and age groups and 
to diffuse the book and reading culture 
throughout all of Athens’ neighbourhoods 
via smaller, localized activities. This is 
expected to increase the self-esteem of the 
people and contribute to social integration 
and coherence. Additionally, the city’s 
creative forces would be merged with a 
common cultural goal: to leave a solid 
legacy, in terms of physical evidence and 
in the mindset of its citizens, encouraging 
them to love and read books, long after 
the year has gone by. 
To make this possible, the City has joined 
hands with over 150 institutions where 
learning takes place, and with writers 
and the publishing industry. 
