Hence this new trend, all over the world, 
to make available sites and monuments 
for private events. There are always, as 
there should be, restrictions about the 
types of events allowed, the areas that are 
authorized for use, the number of guests 
and the hours of opening. 
There are many examples of this trend, 
worldwide. Weddings are held at the 
Royal Palace at Caserta, north of Naples, 
an Italian monument inscribed on the 
World Heritage List; at the Schönbrunn 
Palace, also protected by UNESCO; at the 
Belvedere Palace and Museum in Vienna, 
Austria; and at the Rodin Museum or 
the house of Victor Hugo, in Paris. You 
can even rent the Palace of Versailles, 
the iconic French World Heritage site, for 
specific types of events.
Some monuments inscribed on the World 
Heritage List are now being rented out for 
private events. Is this acceptable?
The question of how heritage sites 
should be used, merits some thought – 
considering that their original purpose 
may have been lost or changed over 
time. For example, railways stations have 
been transformed into museums, while 
convents and historic houses have been 
converted into hotels. 
A heritage building is steeped in historical 
and cultural values. The attributes that 
transmit these values may be tangible – 
such as the building’s design, its form or 
construction elements – or intangible, 
such as its different uses over time, or the 
traditions associated with it. The basic 
principle for the current uses of properties 
is that their new functions should be 
compatible with the preservation of their 
attributes and values.



Heritage for hire: 
a good idea?
Alfredo Conti, interviewed by 
Frédéric Vacheron 
Several high‑profile sites on 
UNESCO's World Heritage List 
can now be hired by the wealthy 
for a wedding or a private party. 
Does this trend risk tarnishing 
these places of great cultural 
value? “No,” says Alfredo Conti, 
Argentinian architect and 
heritage conservation specialist. 
According to him, it could 
even be a way to initiate a 
new section of the public into 
the cultural fold. 
There was a time when heritage sites 
were seen as sacrosanct, especially those 
sites that were most significant from a 
historical or artistic point of view. They 
had to remain frozen in a given moment 
of their history – their only possible use 
was to turn them into museums.
But not all historical buildings can be 
converted into museums, not least 
because heritage conservation is 
very expensive. Most of the time, the 
funding for conservation, maintenance 
and repair comes from the state. 
Admission tickets, the sale of souvenirs 
and catalogues, or providing cafeteria 
services can be a source of revenue, but 
as a rule these are not sufficient to cover 
costs. Government agencies often don’t 
have lavish budgets.  

In the Americas, we have the case of 
Bogotá, in Colombia. The Manzana 
cultural district in the historical centre, 
includes several important museums 
housed in colonial buildings that can 
be hired for private events outside of 
museum opening hours. In the United 
States, Mount Vernon, the residence of 
George Washington, near Washington 
DC, has a very special place in the 
country’s history – but it can easily be 
booked on the internet for an evening. 
Are there other advantages to renting out 
these spaces, besides fundraising? 
Opening up these spaces for private 
events can be beneficial at a cultural 
level. These events often serve to attract 
a different kind of public unfamiliar with 
heritage sites – allowing them to discover 
the place, which may encourage them to 
return to explore the site more deeply. 
Several international documents 
stipulate that heritage must fulfil a 
function of public utility. The Norms 
of Quito, formulated in 1967 by the 
International Council on Monuments 
and Sites (ICOMOS), emphasize the 
economic value of heritage, suggesting 
that historic monuments can be 
considered tourist attractions and like 
natural resources, can contribute to a 
nation’s economic development. This 
was the first major document on Latin 
American monumental heritage. We have 
therefore known for over fifty years that 
heritage is not just a cultural resource, 
but also an economic one. It generates 
income that should contribute to 
its own conservation.
The UNESCO Villa Ocampo Observatory 
allows some of its facilities to be hired. 
What do you think of the way we manage 
this activity? 
Villa Ocampo has a very effective protocol 
for the use of the place – a zone system 
defines which areas can be used and 
under what conditions. For instance, 
private events are not permitted in 
the heritage rooms.
The Argentinian writer Victoria Ocampo 
did not see her house as a museum, 
but as a place that was full of life, 
where she received guests and held 
meetings and receptions. Today when 
the site is rented, a piece of this history 
is being perpetuated. 
An architect and urban planner, 
Alfredo Conti (Argentina) was 
Vice-President of the International 
Council on Monuments and Sites 
(ICOMOS) from 2010 to 2017. He is 
currently Academic Director of the 
Post-graduate Course on Heritage and 
Sustainable Tourism, UNESCO Chair for 
Cultural Tourism in Buenos Aires. Conti 
is also a researcher on the Scientific 
Investigations Commission of the 
Province of Buenos Aires, and director of 
the Institute of Research on Tourism at La 
Plata University.
Frédéric Vacheron is the director of 
UNESCO Villa Ocampo.
An evening of jazz 
at Villa Ocampo, 2016.
