Climate change, by altering the world’s 
physical landscape, is also changing 
its geopolitical landscape. If governments 
are unable to mitigate this, the risks 
of conflict and instability will increase, 
and become more difficult to manage. 
This is the case in many regions 
around the globe. However, the Horn 
of Africa is particularly vulnerable, 
given a combination of structural fragilities 
and the significant exposure to climate 
change risks. This raises the likelihood 
of conflict and instability on the peninsula. 
Caitlin E. Werrell and Francesco Femia 
The effects of global warming 
on the world’s physical landscape 
often lead to geopolitical 
changes that threaten 
to destabilize already vulnerable 
regions, like the Horn of Africa. 
The stresses on natural resources 
undermine the capacity of 
nations to govern themselves, 
and increase the chances 
of conflicts. When compared 
to other drivers of international 
security risks, climate change 
can be modelled with a relatively 
high degree of certainty. 
But between predicting 
and preparing, there is still 
a long way to go.
The current rate of climate change 
– higher seas, decreased ice in the 
Arctic, melting glaciers, extreme rainfall 
variability, and more frequent and intense 
storms – are scenarios that settled 
human societies have never experienced 
before. These dynamics will impact 
the foundational resources that people, 
nations – and the world order built on 
those nations – depend on for survival, 
security and prosperity: particularly food 
and water. These impacts are already 
contributing to increased state fragility 
and security problems in key regions 
around the world – conflict in the Middle 
East and Africa, tensions over fisheries 
in the South China Sea, and a new political 
and economic battleground in a melting 
Arctic Ocean. 
Climate change raises 
conflict concerns
A fragile epicentre 
Over time, climate change stresses 
on natural resources – combined 
with demographic, economic and 
political pressures on those resources 
– can degrade a nation’s capacity to 
govern itself. This includes its ability 
to meet its citizens’ demands for basic 
resources – like food, water, energy and 
employment – also known as its output 
legitimacy. The threat to output legitimacy 
can contribute to state fragility, internal 
conflict, and even state collapse. 
Seen through this lens, climate change 
may present a serious challenge to state 
stability and legitimacy in the Horn 
of Africa – a region already grappling 
with numerous challenges before climate 
change became a factor. 

These challenges have recently been 
confirmed by the United Nations Security 
Council in a January 2018 Statement 
by its President: “The Security Council 
recognises the adverse effects of climate 
change and ecological changes among 
other factors on the stability of West Africa 
and the Sahel region, including through 
drought, desertification, land degradation 
and food insecurity, and emphasizes 
the need for adequate risk assessments 
and risk management strategies by 
governments and the United Nations 
relating to these factors.” 
An elderly woman, displaced 
from her home during the Sudan 
conflict in 2008, waits for her ration 
of emergency food aid. 
Rising sea levels threaten to inundate 
critical infrastructure in these cities, 
contaminate freshwater supplies through 
saltwater intrusion, reduce arable land, 
and potentially displace large numbers 
of people.
The Gulf of Aden is a critical waterway 
along the Horn of Africa. As climate 
change further narrows economic 
opportunities in the region, an even 
greater increase of piracy along the coast 
is likely. Indeed, research has shown that 
there is a significant overlap between 
countries showing a high incidence of 
piracy attacks (off the coasts of Somalia 
and Eritrea), and the most significant 
climate vulnerability in Africa. This paints 
a worrying picture of the kinds of 
overlapping risks that can perpetuate 
state failure in the Horn.
Ocean acidification and warming are 
contributing to the migration and 
depletion of fish stocks around the world, 
including along the coast of the Horn 
of Africa – though the lack of extensive 
monitoring in this region means there is a 
gap in the knowledge of the extent of the 
impacts. Changing ocean chemistry and 
temperatures can increase the likelihood of 
international tensions between countries 
and subnational actors of the Horn that 
share a coastline – including a heightened 
potential for conflict over fishing, as their 
respective fishing fleets roam into 
neighbouring waters, or compete over 
dwindling stocks in international waters. 
Droughts, coupled with other factors, 
are already increasing pressure on 
people in Africa and elsewhere to move. 
Those without the means to move also 
risk becoming “trapped”, or unable to 
move to more secure locations. In the 
future, decreases in precipitation in the 
Horn, and increases in extreme weather 
events, will likely increase the rate and 
scale of migration. According to Robert 
McLeman of Canada’s Wilfrid Laurier 
University: “States that are already 
politically fragile are the most likely 
future epicenters for climate-related 
violence and forced migration events” 
(Epicenters of Climate and Security, 
June 2017). Indeed, of the twenty 
highest-ranked countries that are deemed 
fragile states, twelve are situated in areas 
of the Middle East, South Asia, and Africa, 
where climate change is expected to 
create heightened levels of water scarcity. 
That includes five countries of the Horn: 
Eritrea, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan 
and Sudan.
According to the Fragile States Index of 
The Fund for Peace, the Horn of Africa 
includes some of the most vulnerable states 
in the world – Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, 
Kenya, Sudan and South Sudan. The region 
also exhibits some of the clearest indications 
of a connection between climate change 
and conflict – namely, conflicts between 
agricultural and pastoral communities 
precipitated by climate-exacerbated 
droughts and water variability. 
For example, prolonged 
climate-exacerbated extreme drought, such 
as in Somalia in 2011, can add additional 
stresses to already tense and resource-scarce 
scenarios. These stresses could increase 
tensions and conflict between communities, 
and precipitate the need for people to move 
– impacting the prices of livestock and other 
goods. This could also lead to an increase 
in malnutrition and disease outbreaks, and 
adversely impact food security (For more 
information, see: American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics, Volume 96, Issue 4, 
1 July 2014, pp. 1157–1182). 
Local tensions over access to food 
and water resources can spill over into 
neighbouring countries, as people seek 
to find additional resources and safety 
– placing more strain on the resources 
of those countries, which could amplify 
tensions. In these instances, climate change 
does not directly cause conflict over 
diminishing access to water, for example, 
but it multiplies underlying natural-resource 
stresses, increasing chances of a conflict. 
These are scenarios that, in the absence of 
better governance and natural resource 
management, are going to become 
increasingly pronounced in the future.
Changing geopolitical 
landscape
Several studies, combined with models and 
foresight exercises, show with increasing 
accuracy, the way in which changes in 
climatic conditions can, if left unmitigated, 
scale up to higher-order security situations, 
including a higher likelihood of conflict. A 
lot of the research to this point, however, 
has focused on the links between climate 
change, increased rainfall variability, 
and conflict. Other scenarios in which 
climate impacts and security intersect and 
combine to form the foundation of a new 
geopolitical landscape include:
Urbanization is occurring rapidly in 
the Horn of Africa, including along the 
coast. Coastal cities with burgeoning 
populations, like Mogadishu (Somalia), 
Djibouti City and Mombasa (Kenya) are 
vulnerable to sea-level rise. 


The combination of “unprecedented risk” 
and “unprecedented foresight” underlines 
the case for a “Responsibility to Prepare” 
(Briefing to the UN Security Council, 
December 2017) – a responsibility 
of sub-national, national, 
and intergovernmental institutions to 
build climate resilience into the Horn 
of Africa’s regional order. A failure to meet 
this responsibility could significantly 
strain regional stability in the Horn, 
and around the world.
Caitlin E. Werrell and Francesco Femia 
are the Co-Founders and Presidents 
of the Center for Climate and Security. 
The Washington DC-based, non-partisan 
policy centre, which has a team 
and an Advisory Board of distinguished 
security and military experts, is the only 
institution exclusively focused on 
the security risks of climate change.
