Karl Schroeder, interviewed by Marie Christine Pinault Desmoulins (UNESCO)
Karl Schroeder devotes his time to reading, studying, observing 
and imagining futuristic stories. Internationally renowned as one of 
the stars of science fiction, his books have inspired experts in new 
technologies and artificial intelligence (AI). In addition, he puts his 
imagination to work for companies and governments, to help them 
anticipate their technological, economic and social transformation. 
For the Canadian novelist and essayist, AI is more a cultural than a 
technological revolution – one that requires reflection on ethical, 
governance and legislation issues.
AI and literature: is it really 
all for the best?
Besides your passion for digital and 
technological innovations, what are your 
sources of inspiration?
I devote a substantial part of my time to 
reading great philosophers. This allows 
me to have an overview, to consider 
the possible connections between 
technologies and societal movements. 
But, let me reassure you, I give just as 
much attention to the plot, so that my 
books are entertaining!
At the same time, the internet is an 
infinite source of information and 
distraction. Any navigation on the 
network is an opportunity for new 
discoveries that may encourage me to 
rethink, or even to change radically, 
everything I have just written. The 
internet really makes my research easier 
and I take only the best from it.
Do you foresee that AI could one day 
replace you as a writer?
At this time, I would equate the 
contribution of AI in my field to a 
randomization function, comparable 
to laying out a deck of cards, each of 
which could define a character, a scene, 
etc. For example, one of them could be 
“the king of the bad guys, he is next to a 
tower" and from there, I could develop a 
character, a plot.
I believe that creativity could eventually 
happen outside of human beings. So 
I can imagine that AI will be able to 
create a book worthy of the name, but 
certainly not in its current form. These 
will be different kinds of machines, 
which we have not yet thought up. 
Does this mean you have no 
apprehensions about AI?
Determining whether AI is a threat or a 
benefit is entirely a human responsibility. 
There are many simplistic ideas about AI, 
how it works, and why it could be a threat 
to humanity. One could even say that 
there is an exaggerated anxiety focused 
on losing control of the machine. At the 
stage where we are today, this is not an 
effective way of thinking.
On the other hand, it is imperative to 
choose the direction that AI will take and 
to decide how it will be used. If we decide 
to invest in supermachines for economic 
or political warfare, we are taking the 
path of building a hostile environment, 
of course. Society must make the right 
decisions for the implementation of AI.
Today’s computers do not produce 
meaning, and human intervention 
is always necessary in the creative 
process, even if technological devices 
are becoming more refined and 
approaching human capabilities.
In my novel, Lady of Mazes, there is a 
scene where AI is going insane and 
sets up a kind of creativity bomb that 
fuels millions and millions of novels of 
exceptional quality, literally too many 
for people to read in all their collective 
lifetimes! And so, what happens to 
humans? Well, they adapt and continue 
their own creation.
Imagine that this creative bomb were to 
explode today. Why would that prevent 
me from continuing to write new books? 
Why should I think “me against a million 
books” and not “me and a million books?” 
I consider creativity – whatever its origin 
– an addition, and not a subtraction, to 
our own existence.
In fact, the notion of replacement is 
inherent in the concept of value. We 
could consider that everything can be 
replaced, according to a given value. As a 
writer, I could be replaced by a computer 
that has more commercial success than 
me. But this reasoning is only valid 
if commercial success prevails in the 
value system.

A science fiction novelist, essayist and 
futurist, Karl Schroeder (Canada) is the 
author of ten novels, translated into as 
many languages. They include Ventus 
(2000), Permanence (2002), Lady of Mazes 
(2005), Crisis in Zefra (2005) and Lockstep 
(2014). He received the Netexplo Talent 
Prize at UNESCO in February 2018. 
Scene from Poetic_AI, called the world’s 
biggest AI exhibit, created entirely by 
an algorithm. The Istanbul-based new 
media agency, Ouchhh, created an AI 
to visualize countless stories, books 
and articles, about 20 million lines 
of text – all written by scientists who 
changed the world – to create this 
17-minute installation. 
Ethics? Science fiction 
has been thinking about 
all this for a century!
If one day the products of AI become 
independent of us, they will be like the 
children who leave us when the time 
comes, to lead their own lives! Our 
responsibility as parents is to nurture 
them and to instil positive values. This is 
the cornerstone of the argument.
Is this related to the question of ethics?
Yes, science fiction has been thinking 
about all this for a century! Policymakers 
and society are only just beginning to 
think about these issues. It’s because we 
aren’t seriously examining the subject 
that we resort to free-wheeling every 
time a major technological innovation 
is introduced. Even so, the solution is 
simple – we must decide to implement 
a new technology only after having 
identified its social impact, determined 
its use and legislated accordingly.
I made this issue one of the messages in 
Lady of Mazes – to encourage us to plan 
the implementation of any technological 
innovation, to better anticipate 
societal changes.
What will be the message of your 
next book?
It will undoubtedly deal with the 
future of politics and decision-making 
processes, and also the technological 
means that could take us to another 
level of civilization.
That’s a joke, but I am thinking of writing 
it with a pen! It will be an experiment 
of use, just like the ones that digital 
tools offer us. We must be able to 
distinguish writing from the means of 
writing. Technology is only a means, 
and it must be put back in its proper 
place. There is nothing we need to 
give up about what we are or what we 
want to be – we only have to prepare 
ourselves collectively.
