Beginning in 2007, the European 
Investment Bank (EIB) and the World 
Bank began issuing “green” bonds 
(also known as “climate” bonds) as a 
loan mechanism to show the use of 
proceeds applied to environment-
positive projects. Though the terms 
are often used interchangeably, in 
the case of climate bonds, the use of 
proceeds were further refined to apply 
to climate change mitigation and/
or adaptation projects. The standing 
of these institutions inspired market 
confidence, while a handful of other 
donor and multilateral institutions 
followed their lead.
However, as an investment category, 
green and climate bonds remained 
relatively niche markets, with limited 
impact until about 2013, when issuances 
tripled to around $10 billion, after 
commercial finance and corporate 
institutions began promoting the 
market. These trends continued and 
expanded to $86.1 billion in 2016, 
surpassing $100 billion in 2017.
As a source of climate finance, this 
total is on par with the Paris Climate 
Agreement’s (within the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), and which came into 
force on 4 November 2016) call to reach 
$100 billion worth of climate finance by 
2020. In China alone, green and climate 
bonds have crossed $36.2 billion in 2016.
How green are green 
bonds?
While the market pool has grown rapidly, 
some investors have expressed concern 
that the credibility of these new bonds 
as environmental investments may be 
questionable with the new categories 
of issues. How green are green bonds, 
and could the exposure of ineffective 
investments cause a collapse or systemic 
risk within the market category? 
Climate scientists predict global 
warming of 4–6 °C by the end of the 
century. At the same time, the world 
is entering an age of unprecedented 
urbanization and related infrastructure 
development. To ensure sustainable 
development, this infrastructure needs 
to be both low-carbon and resilient to 
climate change, without compromising 
the kind of economic growth needed to 
improve the livelihoods and well-being 
of the world’s most vulnerable citizens. 
Ensuring that the infrastructure built is 
low-carbon raises the annual investment 
needs by three per cent to four per 
cent, to $6.2 trillion, according to the 
Global Commission on the Economy 
and Climate’s 2016 New Climate 
Economy Report. Climate adaptation 
needs add another significant amount 
of investment, estimated at $280 billion 
to $500 billion per annum by 2050, 
even for a 2 °C scenario (United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP)’s 2016 
Adaptation Finance Gap Report).
Traditional sources of capital for 
infrastructure investment such as 
governments and commercial banks, are 
insufficient to meet capital requirement 
needs to 2030. Institutional investors, 
particularly pension and sovereign 
wealth funds, are increasingly being 
considered viable actors to fill these 
financing gaps. 
Green bonds, which provide an 
opportunity to mobilize capital for 
green, or environmentally sustainable, 
investments, have emerged as 
key financing instruments for the 
application of nature-based solutions 
(NBS). Globally, the green and climate 
bond market is only about a decade old.



Financing natural resilience: 
a new wave
by John H. Matthews, Lily Dai and Anna Creed
The 2018 edition of the World Water Development Report focuses 
on nature-based solutions for water. The issuance of water bonds 
is a relatively new phenomenon in this field, attracting private 
investment towards a sustainable future for natural resources, 
especially water. A new set of global scoring criteria for these bonds 
could help transform the financial markets and boost investment 
in nature-based solutions. 
The United Nations World Water 
Development Report (WWDR), 
released annually on World Water 
Day (22 March) and published by 
UNESCO’s World Water Assessment 
Programme (WWAP) – in close 
collaboration with members and 
partners of UN-Water – is the UN’s 
flagship report that focuses on 
different strategic water issues 
each year. 

The need for open and independent 
standards was identified recently 
by a number of non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) working with 
sustainability issues in the finance and 
investor communities. Water was shown 
to be a gap area, since freshwater 
resources are often relatively hidden 
to investors, who may not readily 
see water embedded within energy, 
agriculture, and urban projects − much 
less how the water within one project 
may affect other issues and systems 
within the same basin.
In mid-2014, a consortium of NGOs − 
Ceres, Climate Bonds Initiative, World 
Resources Institute, CDP (formerly 
the Carbon Disclosure Project), the 
Stockholm International Water Institute 
(SIWI), and the Alliance for Global Water 
Adaptation (AGWA) − coordinated the 
development of criteria to score the 
quality of water-related investments for 
their relevance to climate mitigation 
and climate adaptation. Together, they 
organized a series of technical and 
industry working groups, which defined 
scoring criteria for issuers and verifiers 
to provide investor confidence in 
climate bonds. 
Evaluating nature-
based solutions
These criteria effectively score the 
climate resilience and climate adaptive 
potential of these bonds in addition 
to their environmental impact. These 
issues remain well understood by 
engineers, scientists, and resource 
managers. But the level of even basic 
awareness among investor and finance 
groups is far more limited. Phase 1 of 
the work targeted traditional “grey” 
water infrastructure investments, with 
the exclusion of hydropower, and was 
launched in October 2016.
More broadly, the risk of greenwashing 
for nature-based solutions − 
investments in green and hybrid 
infrastructure − are very high. No 
science-based standard for such 
investments exists, much less the ability 
to certify that the ecosystems involved 
will themselves endure and be resilient 
to climate impacts. 
Recognizing this gap, the Rockefeller 
Foundation provided support in 2016 
to develop phase 2 criteria to evaluate 
and qualify nature-based solutions 
(NBS) for water investments. NBS 
investments depend explicitly on the 
use of ecosystems to provide grey 
infrastructure-like services, such as 
through so-called natural or green and 
hybrid infrastructure. Such services 
could include storm-water and flood 
protection through riparian ecosystems, 
water treatment in wetlands, and water 
storage in aquifers. These additional 
criteria were launched in early 2018.
Together, both phases evaluate the 
climate mitigation impact, and the 
ability of the investment to contribute 
to climate change adaptation.
In May 2016, the San Francisco Public 
Utilities Commission (SFPUC) in 
California, United States, issued the 
world’s first certified green bond for 
water, for $240 million. A second bond 
for $259 million was issued by the 
SFPUC in December 2016. Both bonds 
are certified under the Climate Bonds 
Standard, an investor screening tool 
that specifies the criteria that must be 
met for bonds to be labelled “green” or 
earmarked for funding water-related 
low-carbon initiatives. 
In July 2017, the City of Cape Town 
issued South Africa’s first certified 
green bond for 1 billion South African 
rand. In September 2017, the China 
Development Bank (CDB), a state-
owned policy bank, announced that 
it will issue green bonds for 5 billion 
yuan to raise funds for water resource 
protection along the Yangtze River 
Economic Belt, the China Daily 
newspaper reported.
The successful issuance 
and sale of green bonds 
against the Standard 
represents a vivid shift in 
investor awareness

The successful issuance and sale of 
these and other bonds against the 
Standard represents a vivid shift in 
investor awareness. To date, more than 
$1 billion have been issued against 
the grey criteria − a number that is 
expected to be rapidly achieved with 
the integrated nature-based solutions 
criteria as well. 
In a time of ecological and climate 
transformation, these criteria are also 
helping to transform finance itself. 
John H. Matthews (United States) is 
Coordinator and co-founder of the 
Alliance for Global Water Adaptation 
(AGWA), which is hosted by the World 
Bank and the Stockholm International 
Water Institute (SIWI). 
Lily Dai (China) is a Senior Research 
Analyst at Climate Bonds Initiative. 
Anna Creed (United Kingdom) is the 
Head of Standards at Climate Bonds 
Initiative. 
Colorado River delta, near San 
Felipe, in the Mexican state of 
Baja California, 2011.
