Poster from The Battle of Algiers, 
a Film within History, 
a documentary by Malik Bensmaïl.
© Hikayet Films/Ina 

Why did you choose documentary film as 
a medium of expression?
More than fiction, documentary film is 
capable of countering national myths. 
Not to destroy them, but to put them 
in their place, so that they do not crush 
society. If you do not film your own 
reality, how will you be able to watch 
yourself? Where would your inspiration 
come from? Where would your dreams 
come from? Also, do we need to be 
reminded, cinema was born from the 
documentary – remember the Lumière 
brothers? The documentary film 
determines the collective imagination. 
It is this reality that nurtures fiction and 
holds up a mirror to society. I know that 
filming real life can be disturbing; but I 
also know that it matures you. 
One of the assets of democracy, press 
freedom, is the subject of your film about 
the independent Algerian newspaper, 
El Watan, released in 2015. Why did you 
call it Checks and Balances?
A free press is a democratic asset that 
many journalists paid for with their 
lives, during the civil war in Algeria. 
The war, which broke out in 1991, left 
200,000 dead and 100,000 missing. 
Around 120 Algerian journalists were 
murdered by Islamist extremists between 
1993 and 1998. But that still does not 
mean that the free press represents a real 
force of opposition in my country today.
For this film, I decided to take an 
“oblique” look, by following a team of 
journalists at work. What interested me 
was not so much the press as a counter-
force, but the counter-forces represented 
by individuals. 



Filming reality 
can be disturbing, but it matures you
Malek Bensmaïl 
Malek Bensmaïl, interviewed by Jasmina Šopova 
Three years after Algeria’s independence in 1962 – and after eight 
years of civil war – Italian director Gillo Pontecorvo shot The Battle of 
Algiers. The film is about one of the bloodiest episodes in the Algerian 
war, when Algeria’s pro-Independence National Liberation Front 
(FLN) clashed with the French colonial authorities in 1957. 
On 19 June 1965, even as the film was being shot, Colonel Houari 
Boumédiène’s FLN troops entered Algiers. Tanks being used for the 
film got mixed up with the real tanks, and President Ahmed Ben Bella’s 
supporters could see nothing but fire. As a result, he was overthrown!
Half a century later, in 2017, Malek Bensmaïl examined the historic 
role of Pontecorvo’s black-and-white newsreel-style classic in his 
documentary, The Battle of Algiers, a Film Within History. But this is 
not a “film about a film”, he explains. It is more an interpretation of his 
country’s history – the revolution, the coup, the regime changes, the 
decolonization. For almost thirty years, the Algerian director has been 
creating what he calls “the contemporary memory” of his country.
In the 1990s, when we were in the middle 
of the “black decade” in Algeria, I opted 
for reality. And I continue along that 
path. My idea is to make a film every one 
or two years, about people, institutions, 
important social issues. I would like these 
films to provide a better understanding of 
how a country is built over time. 
My intention is to create a contemporary 
memory, by showing this laboratory, 
which is Algeria – a country searching 
for its identity, with its progress, its 
setbacks, its questions. You don’t achieve 
democracy with a snap of the fingers. Or 
with guns, for that matter!
Portrait of Malek Bensmaïl, 2016.
© Bruno Lévy / Divergence

Their objective is to provide accurate 
information from balanced sources. 
Besides, most of them have websites 
that are free and accessible to everyone, 
including the diaspora. 
What is El Watan doing to preserve 
its independence? How does it ensure 
its survival? 
Through newspaper sales – it has a 
print run of 140,000 copies, which sell 
at 20 Algerian dinars (about €0.20) 
each – and through advertising. The 
paper, which has been deprived of 
advertising revenue from the state since 
1993, has invested in an advertising 
and distribution network, and in an 
independent printing facility which it 
shares with El Khabar. The paper has 
also turned to the private sector for 
advertising, which enables it to pay the 
100 journalists and correspondents that 
make up its editorial staff.
That said, the newspaper has had at least 
six interruptions in its publication, and 
has been involved in some 200 lawsuits, 
which have made it financially vulnerable. 
I was surprised to hear Omar Belhouchet, 
the paper’s founder and director, say 
that he found these court cases very 
important for the democratic process. 
I thought they were painful experiences, 
but he felt that they allowed him not only 
to defend journalists and cartoonists, 
but also to defend the very notion of the 
freedom of expression, which is written in 
the Constitution. 
These trials give him (Belhouchet) the 
opportunity to explain to the court what 
a caricature is, what humour is, what a 
chronicle is, what an investigation is, and 
where the restraints in society are. He 
actually uses these court cases to educate 
young magistrates about freedom of 
the press. 
Education is central to your 2008 
documentary, La Chine est encore loin 
(China is Still Far Away). Why do you refer 
to China when it’s about a classroom in 
a school in Tiffelfel, a small village in the 
Aurès mountains, where the Algerian war 
began, in November 1954?
The title refers to a quote from the 
Prophet Muhammad: “Seek knowledge, 
going all the way to China, if need be”. 
China is therefore a symbolic land, the 
land of knowledge, which can only be 
reached with considerable effort. A land 
that is still far away, seen from Algeria.
Just before making this film, I had shot a 
documentary on madness (Aliénations, 
2004). I spent three months in a psychiatric 
hospital and came across many cases of 
people with politico-religious delusions. 
I wondered what the origins of this 
pathology were. A psychiatrist gave me 
the answer: “It’s society”. That encouraged 
me to go and see how young people 
were being taught, what ideas were being 
passed on to them at school. So, I went 
to the school in the village where the 
Algerian war had started.
It was a very violent war, that lasted almost 
eight years. Thanks to its victory, Algeria 
has become a myth, and successive 
regimes have worked hard to consolidate 
this myth. I’m not saying it is not a good 
thing to forge a sense of national pride 
among the people, and for them to value 
their heroism. But I disagree when this is 
done in a way that is completely out of 
step with local daily life. I wanted to film 
an Algeria that works every day, that fights 
every day, under that myth. 
In Algeria, the notion of the individual has 
not yet fully developed. We are locked 
into the idea of a community. We have 
a nation to defend, a country to defend, 
a god to defend, a language to defend. 
There is always that “one” figure, which 
is omnipresent, omnipotent, which is 
supposed to include us all – while in 
reality there are celebrities, intellectuals, 
journalists, judges, students, etc., who live 
in a multicultural and multilingual space, 
who think differently and who constitute 
a set of small checks and balances 
necessary for a democracy.
What good is an independent newspaper 
if it has no impact on society?
Even when it does not constitute a 
real counter-force, the free press does 
manage to condemn the invisible acts 
of violence no one talks about. Algeria 
is currently seen as a calm country, 
protected from terrorism, but in fact it 
is not immune from humiliation and 
manipulation.
El Watan is not the only newspaper 
doing this work. There are a few others, 
including Le Quotidien d'Oran, El Khabar, 
Liberté and, to a certain extent, Le 
Soir d'Algérie, which are also involved 
in the resistance and the struggle. 
They are not opposition newspapers. 

Scene from the documentary La Chine 
est encore loin, by Malek Bensmaïl, 2008

The film shows the gulf that separates 
the myth from the social reality. At the 
end of the day, we realize that what we 
are teaching children is hatred of the 
other. The film also shows that Koranic 
education today is far removed from the 
words of the Prophet. Political Islamism 
has done a lot of damage that is still 
being felt today, especially in rural areas.
Is that the reason why only one woman 
– Rachida, the school cleaner – is given a 
voice in the film? 
Rachida is amazing. She gave me a 
wonderful lesson in freedom! She comes 
from another village in southern Algeria, 
from where she had to escape because 
she was divorced and was therefore 
considered a prostitute.
It was impossible to interview other 
women, even though, in this region, 
women were once known for their 
management of the economy – carpet-
making and farming were in their hands. 
Today they are hidden behind the walls 
of their houses. In the countryside, they 
hardly ever leave their homes, even veiled.
It is the men who go to market. That 
is unheard of! The years of Islamism 
and conservatism have wiped out the 
traditional social role of women, along 
with all the gains they had achieved with 
their emancipation. During the shoot, 
they sent us trays of food, cakes and 
coffee through the children, but we didn’t 
see a single woman.
Algerian film director Malek Bensmaïl 
has been making documentary films 
since 1990, while his country was going 
through the “bloody decade”. His films 
have received critical acclaim and several 
prizes at international festivals. They have 
been screened in cinemas and broadcast 
on television worldwide, on channels 
including Arte (France-Germany), 
TV Cultura (Brazil), RTBF (Belgium), TV3 
(Spain), YLE (Finland), France TV, Canal + 
(France), RTSI, RTSR (Switzerland), Channel 
Four (United Kingdom), and global 
television networks TV5 Monde and the 
BBC. In 2010, he was the Villa Kujoyama 
laureate in Kyoto, Japan. A retrospective 
of his work exhibits at leading universities 
in the United States in autumn, 2018.
“You make a film with, not about, people 
in real life,” says director Malek Bensmaïl. 
This group of students helped with the 
shooting of La Chine est encore loin.
