The Peruvian artist Fernando Bryce 
works on a sketch in August 2018, inspired by 
issues of the Courier on human rights.
© Fernando Bryce

a more cultural point of view, both in 
my discourse and in my subject matter. 
UNESCO provided me with the theme 
of the United Nations, founded on the 
fundamental idea of human rights and its 
universalist discourse – with all its ideas 
of progress and its future prospects, at 
a time when everything was yet to be 
constructed. 
Where does the title of the series, 
The Book of Needs, come from? 
The Book of Needs was published by 
UNESCO in 1947 to highlight the 
immense educational, scientific and 
cultural losses and needs in the world in 
the post-war period. In (March) 1948, the 
UNESCO Courier wrote about this, and I 
found it so emblematic that I used the 
same title for my series. 



Fernando Bryce:
History in the present tense
Interview by Carolina Rollán 
Ortega and Lucía Iglesias Kuntz 
(UNESCO) 
“Mimetic analysis” is how 
Peruvian artist Fernando Bryce 
describes his work process. It 
involves using ink on paper, and 
meticulously copying by hand, 
texts and images taken from 
magazines, political pamphlets, 
posters and old newspapers. 
Using this technique, he has 
captured moments from 
recent history, like the Cuban 
revolution, the Spanish Civil War 
and the Second World War, in 
his work. In 2015, our magazine 
was the source of inspiration 
for a series of drawings called 
The Book of Needs, to which a 
supplement of this issue of the 
Courier is dedicated. Let’s find 
out what it’s all about. 
Could you tell us about the work that you 
produced using the UNESCO Courier?
It is a series of eighty-one drawings 
that depict the work of the UNESCO 
Courier – from its founding in 1948, to 
1954 – based on images of its covers or 
on its articles. The series is part of a whole 
cycle which I have been working on for 
several years, with the iconography and 
representations of the twentieth century. 
These show temporary advances and 
setbacks in the world, and each series 
is constructed differently, with different 
types of images. I have just finished a 
series on the Second World War, using 
archival material that I found – in this 
case, film posters and newspaper 
headlines – that reported on war events. 
After that series was completed, in 2015 
I decided to approach my work from 
Fernando Bryce in front of UNESCO 
Headquarters in Paris, June 2018.
How did you access material from 
the UNESCO Courier?
I had already gathered a lot of material 
on UNESCO in the process of researching 
my previous work. I also had access to the 
digital resources of the Courier archives 
and the Berlin State Library. 
I must say that the magazine is 
fascinating – a fabulous historical 
document that deals with a very special 
moment, when the idea of progress 
was genuinely linked to a whole new 
perspective. A striking contrast between 
the convictions at the time and the state 
of the world today. 
What surprised me, when going through 
issues of the Courier between 1948 and 
1954, is the observation that many of 
the problems afflicting the world and 
humanity at that time remain the same 
today, and have not been resolved at all. 
Although the world has changed a lot, the 
issues that concern us remain the same. 

More recently, in May and June 2018, I 
have exhibited the Freedom First series 
in Berlin, Germany, inspired by the 
publications of the Congress for Cultural 
Freedom, an association founded in Berlin 
in 1950 to campaign against totalitarian 
regimes. It is a retrospective look at the 
start of the Cold War. 
When did you come up with the idea of 
drawing inspiration from archives? 
Twenty years ago, I moved to Berlin. The 
city was going through a very significant 
period of transition at the time, and I was 
very inspired by the place – where there 
was a great debate about the concept of 
memory. At these historical moments, 
the notion of archives acquires its 
full meaning. 
What, according to you, are these concerns? 
Anti-humanist tendencies are the real 
political challenge facing an international 
organization like UNESCO. There have 
always been differences in worldviews 
and representations of the world, but the 
criticism of a certain universalism, which 
is too Eurocentric, or the current crisis 
of multiculturalism, cannot undermine 
the foundations of, and respect for, 
human rights. And, justly, human rights 
are a doctrine of faith for the United 
Nations and UNESCO – whether they are 
respected or not. 
As with your work with the UNESCO 
Courier, it is a constant in your repertoire 
to work with historical material and 
archives, which you transform into art. 
Could you describe this process? 
To begin with, there is always an interest 
in history, both in the sense of the event 
and in that of its writing. An archive is 
organized from the present and history is 
also in this present. The point of my work 
is to rescue this history and update it. I 
convert a documentary universe into a 
new reality, through drawing. In this new 
context, these creations can be viewed 
in a different light, in which documents 
are perceived as images. What I’m trying 
to do is a second-hand job, turning the 
document into a work of art. 
In addition to the series inspired by the 
Courier, I have worked on ARTnews, an 
American visual-arts magazine founded 
in the early twentieth century; Arte 
Nuevo, a Latin American art journal 
based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and 
other magazines and publications. 
The cover of the Courier, February 
1951 and its artistic interpretation by 
Fernando Bryce in 2015.
What I’m 
trying to do is 
a second-hand 
job, turning 
the document 
into a work 
of art

Also, I was not satisfied with the artistic 
work I was producing at the time. It was 
then that I discovered the technique 
of ink drawing, which takes me back to 
writing without abandoning painting. 
This discovery, together with the notion 
of archives and visits to real archives 
– where the encounter with the past 
raises all kinds of questions – inspired 
a new artistic approach in me that has 
determined all my later work. 
Why did you select images particularly 
from those eighty-one pages and covers 
of the Courier and what did you want to 
draw attention to?
My work is a permanent process of 
selection. In this case, I chose images 
that seemed to me the most relevant 
to UNESCO’s mission, namely the fight 
against racist doctrines and the anti-
racist discourse launched by the UNESCO 
Courier, starting with the writings of 
Claude Lévi-Strauss, for example. I would 
like to refer here to the idea of the 
equality of peoples and cultures and 
the oneness of humanity. 
I also found vintage material related to 
decolonization, represented both by 
countries newly liberated from colonial 
rule and by the terminal efforts of a so-
called liberal colonialism that, until the 
mid-1950s, still believed that it could 
maintain its empire. And, of course, the 
question of so-called “primitive” peoples. 
In this respect, Claude Lévi-Strauss made 
a great contribution by stating that these 
peoples were not backward, but that their 
thinking was complex. Broadly speaking, 
I am interested in the correlation – 
highlighted in the Courier – between 
scientific progress and human progress. 
After the great catastrophe of the Second 
World War, there was a conviction that 
everything was possible and that the 
world would be a better place. Do you 
think this belief still exists? 
No, this faith no longer exists. We find 
ourselves at some sort of dead end, 
and we have to look for some. There is 
a sharp contrast between that period of 
optimism after the Second World War 
and the situation we find ourselves in 
today. Updating that material in the way 
I’ve tried to do is perhaps the mission of 
my work. From the territory of art and 
at a necessarily symbolic level where 
reflection and experiment go hand in 
hand, we artists may not have the power 
to change much, but we can, I hope, 
point out possible horizons. 
Born in Lima, Peru in 1965, Fernando 
Bryce began his studies in the plastic 
arts at the Pontifical Catholic University 
of Peru, before moving to France to 
continue his studies at Université Paris 8 
and the École nationale supérieure des 
beaux-arts. In the 1990s, he moved 
to Berlin, where he learnt the ink and 
paper technique and discovered 
the newspaper archives of the Berlin 
State Library. He now lives between 
Lima, Berlin and New York, where he 
recently exhibited his The Book of Needs 
collection. Completed in 2015, it can be 
viewed online on the websites of the 
Harvard Art Museums and the Alexander 
and Bonin gallery in New York.
