It must be remembered, further, that 
one of the main emphases which have 
underlain past Declarations of Rights has 
been the presumed antagonism between 
the freedom of the individual citizen 
and the authority of the government in 
the political community. It is not merely 
that the rights of the citizens have been 
conceived in individualist terms, and 
upon the political plane.  

Against an
individualistic
impasse
Harold Joseph Laski 
“Any attempt by the United 
Nations to formulate a 
Declaration of Human Rights 
in individualist terms would 
quite inevitably fail,” wrote the 
British academic and politician, 
Harold J. Laski (1893‑1950). 
According to him, to go beyond 
these individualistic terms, the 
state must intervene to ensure 
a certain number of social rights 
for its citizens. This is an excerpt 
from his text, sent to UNESCO 
from London in June 1947, under 
the title “Towards a Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights”. 
All rights proclaimed in the great 
documents of this character are in fact 
statements of aspiration, the fulfilment of 
which is limited by the view taken by the 
ruling class of any political community 
of its relations to the security of interests 
they are determined to maintain.
Too Heavy to Bear, a poster by 
Chinese-German artist Ji Kun, one of 
the participants in the Work Right! 
competition organized in 2014 by the 
human rights non-profit, 4tomorrow. 
It is of the first importance, if a document 
of this kind is to have lasting influence and 
significance, to remember that the Great 
Declarations of the past are a quite special 
heritage of Western civilization, that 
they are deeply involved in a Protestant 
bourgeois tradition, which is itself an 
outstanding aspect of the rise of the 
middle class to power, and that, though 
their expression is universal in its form, the 
attempts at realization which lie behind 
that expression have too rarely reached 
below the level of the middle class. 
“Equality before the law” has not meant 
very much in the lives of the working class 
in most political communities, and still less 
to Negroes in the Southern states of the 
United States. “Freedom of Association” was 
achieved by trade unions in Great Britain 
only in 1871; in France, save for a brief 
interval in 1848, only in 1884; in Germany 
only in the last years of the Bismarckian era, 
and then but partially; and, in a real way, 
in the U.S.A. only with the National Labour 
Relations Act of 1935; this Act itself is now 
in serious jeopardy in Congress. 

There is the deeper problem that has 
arisen from the unconscious, or half-
conscious, assumption of those who 
wrote the great documents of the past 
that every addition to governmental 
power is a subtraction from individual 
freedom. Maxims like Bentham’s famous 
“each man is the best judge of his own 
interest” and that “each man must count 
as one and not more than one”, have their 
roots in that pattern of social organization 
so forcibly depicted by Adam Smith: 
in which, under any “simple system of 
natural liberty”, men competing fiercely 
with one another in economic life are 
led, each of them, “by an invisible hand 
to promote an end which was no part 
of his intention”, and that end, by some 
mysterious alchemy, is the good of the 
whole community. 
Even if it be argued – and it is at least 
doubtful whether it can be argued – that 
this liberal pattern was ever valid, it is 
certainly not valid today. There are vital 
elements in the common good which 
can only be achieved by action under the 
state-power – education, housing, public 
health, security against unemployment; 
these, at a standard acceptable to the 
community in an advanced society in 
Western civilization, cannot be achieved 
by any cooperation of citizens who do 
not exercise the authority of government. 
It becomes plain, on any close analysis, 
that so far from there being a necessary 
antagonism between individual freedom 
and governmental authority, there are 
areas of social life in which the second is 
the necessary condition of the first. No 
statement of rights could be relevant 
to the contemporary situation which 
ignored this fact. [...] 
Ideological differences
In the light of such considerations as 
these, any attempt by the United Nations 
to formulate a Declaration of Human 
Rights in individualist terms would 
quite inevitably fail. It would have little 
authority in those political societies which 
are increasingly, both in number and 
in range of effort, assuming the need 
to plan their social and economic life. It 
is, indeed, legitimate to go further and 
say that if the assumptions behind such 
a Declaration were individualistic, the 
document would be regarded as a threat 
to a new way of life by the defenders of 
historic principles which are now subject 
to profound challenge. Its effect would be 
to separate, and not to unify, the groping 
towards common purposes achieved 
through common institutions and 
common standards of behaviour which 
it is the objective of such a Declaration 
to promote.
Nothing, in fact, is gained, and a great 
deal may be lost, unless a Declaration of 
this character notes the fact of important 
ideological differences between political 
societies and takes full account of their 
consequences in the behaviour both 
of persons and institutions. To attempt 
to gloss them over would be to ignore 
completely the immense changes they 
involve in the attitude that a socialist 
society, on the one hand, even a society 
beginning to embark on socialist 
experiment, and a capitalist society, on the 
other, is likely to take to things like private 
property, law, both civil and criminal, 
the services of health and education, 
the possibility of living, between certain 
ages, without the duty to earn a living, the 
place of the arts – of, indeed, culture in its 
widest sense – in the society, the methods 
of communicating news and ideas, the 
ways in which citizens adopt a vocation 
in life, the conditions of promotion in 
the vocation adopted, and the relation 
of trade unionism to the process of 
economic production. [...]

Human Rights, 1995, by Algerian-born 
Belgian artist, Boubeker Hamsi.The weight of 
the ruling class
It is difficult, moreover, to avoid the 
conclusion that was aptly formulated 
by Marx when he said that “the ruling 
ideas of an age are the ideas of its ruling 
class”. From that conclusion it follows 
that, historically, previous Declarations 
of Rights have in fact been attempts to 
give special sanctity to rights which some 
given ruling class at some given time in 
the life of a political society it controlled 
felt to be of peculiar importance to the 
members of that class. It is no doubt true 
that they were often, even usually, written 
out in universal form; perhaps even their 
claim to the status of universality gave 
them a power of inspiration beyond 
the area in which they were intended 
to be effective. But it remains generally 
true that in their application, the status 
of universality was always reduced to a 
particularity made, so far as possible, to 
coincide with what a ruling class believed 
to be in its interest, or what it regarded as 
the necessary limits of safe concession. [...] 
Towards a Declaration 
that is bold 
and concrete
An International Declaration of 
Human Rights which was based on 
these premises and built upon these 
conclusions, to which men and women 
all over the world might look for a 
programme of action, would be a 
valuable stimulus to the recognition of 
the need for reforms, any long denial 
of which is likely to result in violent 
revolution here, to violent counter 
revolution there, and perhaps, even more 
grimly, to international conflict which 
may easily assume the character of a 
global civil war. 
To provide the appropriate inspiration, 
such a Declaration would have to be 
both bold in its general character and 
concrete in its detailed conduct. It 
would have to take account rather of the 
possibilities which are struggling to be 
born than of the traditions that are dying 
before our eyes. It would be better to 
have no Declaration than one that was 
half-hearted and lacking in precision, or 
one which sought an uneasy compromise 
between irreconcilable principles of social 
action. A Declaration such as is proposed 
would do more harm than good unless it 
was issued in the confident expectation 
that the members of the United Nations 
gave to it an unquestionable faith 
and respect. 
An age like our own, which has seen the 
impotence of the League of Nations, the 
contemptuous disregard of the Kellogg-
Briand Pact and the cynical violation 
of international law and customs, and 
has lived under the barbarous tyranny 
of regimes which made torture and 
wholesale murder the sanctions of their 
policy, cannot afford another failure of 
so supreme a significance as this failure 
would mean. They have no right to offer 
hope to mankind who are not prepared 
to organize the essential conditions 
without which it has no prospect of being 
fulfilled. The next betrayal by statesmen 
of what the common man regards as 
the basis of his self-respect as a human 
being will be the prelude to a disaster this 
civilization is unlikely to survive.
A British political scientist and academic, 
Harold J. Laski (1893-1950) was a 
prominent member of the British Labour 
Party. He taught at McGill University 
in Canada, Harvard University in the 
United States, and the London School of 
Economics and Political Science in the 
United Kingdom. He was also the author 
of numerous books on democracy and 
socialism. Laski was one of UNESCO’s 
most ardent and valued collaborators on 
several of its early projects.
