A team of four trained educators run ten 
programmes a year, devised for children, 
families and older students. Any school 
or individual can sign up for hour-long 
training sessions and other activities 
including talks and films, all covering 
topics at the core of the history of the 
Nobel Peace Prize – such as conflict 
resolution and human rights.
Defining peace 
is not easy 
Our first task with the children is to 
explore the concept of peace. Everyone 
knows they want peace, but it is not that 
simple to talk about or teach. When we 
start to define it, most students say at first 
that peace is the absence of war. 
But is that enough? We challenge them 
to think further. Can peace be something 
more than the absence of war, and if so, 
what is it? And what destroys peace? 
by Toril Rokseth
Peace is more than the absence 
of war. That’s the crucial start 
of the learning curve for young 
people. The Nobel Peace Center 
in Oslo, official showcase for 
the Nobel Peace Prize, runs its 
own education programme, 
teaching peace. More than 
10,000 children aged between 
6 and 19 visit the Center 
each year.
Every year, thousands of schoolchildren 
walk through the doors of a converted 
railway station overlooking the harbour 
in the heart of Oslo, Norway’s capital, in 
search of one elusive thing – peace. 
An initiative of Geir Lundestad, former 
director of the Norwegian Nobel Institute, 
the Nobel Peace Center serves as a 
museum about the Nobel Peace Prize. 
An independent foundation, financed 
through a combination of private 
donations and government grants, its 
mission is to promote interest in, and 
knowledge of, the Nobel Peace Prize and 
tell the story of Alfred Nobel and the 
Peace Prize laureates. 
Through its events, the Center aims to 
foster reflection and engagement on 
topics related to war, peace and conflict 
resolution. Since it opened in 2005, it 
has welcomed over 1.6 million visitors 
to its more than sixty permanent and 
temporary exhibitions – including 
twelve about the Peace Prize, and 
exhibitions about the laureates and 
other world leaders.
Alongside that work, the Center runs an 
education programme aimed at opening 
young minds to the concept of peace, 
how it is defined and cultivated. More 
than 10,000 children aged between 6 and 
19 from Norway, Europe and further 
afield, visit the Center each year. 



Can peacebe taught?
The obvious answers are war and conflict, 
but peace can also be destroyed by 
poverty, racism, environmental disasters, 
or the absence of democracy and human 
rights. We start to pose harder questions. 
If racism destroys peace, should we not 
oppose it? If poverty destroys peace, 
should we not work to eradicate it? If the 
absence of human rights destroys peace, 
should we not work to ensure human 
rights for everyone? 
We also ask the students about their 
views on what promotes peace. This 
enables us to more fully explore topics 
such as human rights, how countries 
and groups can work together, and 
respect between people. The purpose of 
these questions is to provoke them into 
understanding that peace is a positive 
rather than a negative. 
At the Center, we believe the goal of our 
work is for students to acquire knowledge 
and values that can be transformed into 
actions that benefit them personally, and 
their communities. To nurture conscious, 
tolerant, empathetic citizens, the 
foundation must be democracy, human 
rights and conflict resolution.
Juan Manuel Santos, President of 
Colombia and Nobel Peace Prize 2016 
laureate, at the Nobel Peace Center 
in December 2016.

Starting with 
the basics
“Democracy has to be born anew every 
generation, and education is its midwife,” 
wrote John Dewey in The School and 
Society. The American philosopher, 
psychologist and educational reformer 
(1859-1952) believed in teaching children 
through problem-solving rather than by 
learning facts by rote. We try to use the 
same approach. 
When we talk about human rights, we 
start with basics, like asking students 
if they feel they are heard when they 
express opinions. From this, it is a small 
step to talking about others who have 
not been allowed to talk freely – like 
Nobel laureates Nelson Mandela and 
the German pacifist Carl von Ossietzky, 
for example. We then discuss the 
responsibility that follows from basic 
human rights.
We adapt our methods to the age and 
ability of our students. We know, for 
example, that role-play works very well 
when the youngest students are being 
taught the importance of children’s rights. 
We challenge older students to take a 
stand in difficult cases based on true-life 
dilemmas. Above all, we try to ensure that 
the sessions are relevant and help build 
critical thinking. 
Drawing on personal 
experiences 
A directed discussion with open-ended 
questions can strengthen the students’ 
empathetic abilities. What is racism? 
What happens inside a person 
repeatedly exposed to racism? What 
are the consequences of racism? In 
group discussions, students learn how 
to articulate their opinions and expand 
their theoretical vocabulary. We draw on 
their personal experiences to reinforce 
the universal aspect of human rights 
and create a safe framework for them to 
share, and to try out standpoints with 
each other. 
Our programmes also make use of 
our archive and the laureates’ work, as 
powerful concrete examples of actions 
for peace. This may include the Austrian 
novelist and pacifist Bertha von Suttner 
(the first woman to be solely awarded 
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905), for her 
persistent efforts in the international 
peace movement; American activist 
Martin Luther King, Jr.’s (awarded in 1964) 
use of non-violent methods to further the 
Civil Rights movement, or Iranian human 
rights lawyer Shirin Ebadi’s (awarded 
in 2003) audacious work to achieve 
universal human rights.
To follow up, we highly recommend that 
teachers take the conversation started 
at the Center back to the classroom. We 
provide follow-up tasks on our website, 
to support practice and knowledge-
deepening activities. We often receive 
very positive feedback from teachers 
about the way in which the visit has 
stimulated thought and debate among 
their students.
Toril Rokseth (Norway) is Director of 
Education at the Nobel Peace Center, 
where she leads a team of 
four educators. 
The Nobel Field, designed by American 
artist, David Small, is often called 
the heart of the Nobel Peace Center.
