The UNESCO Courier, October 1961. 
I knew that I would find a variety of 
opinions in its pages, and a vision that 
was not apolitical − that is not the point 
– but objective; an analysis of the subjects 
that was both balanced and thorough 
at the same time. 
I still have a particularly vivid memory 
of the issues dedicated to the Nubia 
campaign. I was a high-school student 
back then, and knew nothing about the 
Abu Simbel temple. In the Courier issue 
of February 1960, Save the Treasures of 
Nubia, I learnt that the construction of the 
Aswan Dam across the Nile in Egypt would 
flood 3,000-year-old monuments. This was 
at the end of the 1950s, and UNESCO 
mobilized the whole world to save them. 
I came from very modest beginnings 
− my grandparents were illiterate and my 
parents barely knew how to read and write. 
My knowledge came from my studies in 
the public-school system of my country, 
Uruguay, and from my reading. Between 
the ages of 12 and 17, I regularly read the 
UNESCO Courier and that is how I absorbed 
culture. I can still see the images on the 
magazine’s covers, and so many questions 
that shook the world − of science, culture, 
and education during the past century 
− come back to mind. Many of these issues 
still make headlines and remain relevant 
− the challenges posed by illiteracy, 
access to water, preserving the world’s 
historical heritage, etc.
Since it was launched in 1948, the journal 
rapidly gained enormous prestige because 
of its open-mindedness – which made 
it a reference source for hot topics 
and controversial issues. 
Roberto Markarian 
In the 1960s, a teenager dreamed 
of escaping the cramped 
confines of his home in a poor 
neighbourhood in Montevideo, 
where he lived with his parents, 
who were barely literate. 
He wanted to go far, and went 
on to pursue a brilliant career in 
pure and applied mathematics 
in Brazil. He was eventually 
elected rector of the University 
of the Republic in Uruguay, 
in 2014. But before that, Roberto 
Markarian attended another kind 
of school – that of free thought 
– which he discovered within 
the pages of the .

Back cover of the Courier 
of February 1967.
The Organization garnered tremendous 
international support to undertake 
the monumental effort of entirely 
dismantling the majestic Abu Simbel 
temple and rebuilding it at another 
location, several metres higher − so that 
twice a year, the rays of the sun would 
penetrate the temple’s inner sanctuary, 
just as they did in its original location.
A formative journal
Impressed by the four colossi of Rameses 
II, I read, in an issue entitled Abu Simbel, 
Now or Never (Courier, October 1961), 
this detailed explanation by Peter 
Ritchie-Calder, the famous British scientific 
writer: “A narrow passage leads to the inner 
sanctuary where are seated the statues 
of the three gods to whom the temple is 
dedicated, and Rameses himself. 
And here is seen the purposeful ingenuity 
of the architects and engineers. Like skilful 
stage-lighters, they contrived that the 
rising sun would penetrate 200 feet into 
the heart of the mountain, to illumine 
the faces of only three of the immortals. 
The fourth, the god of the Underworld, 
Ptah, on the extreme left remained 
eternally in darkness. This essential feature 
of Abu Simbel was one of the things taken 
into account in deciding how the temple 
should be finally preserved from the rising 
waters of the High Dam.”
Year after year, the Courier reported 
on every step of this unprecedented 
international undertaking − The Nubian 
Campaign is Launched (May 1960), 
“An Account of Excavation in Nubia during 
1961-1962” (November 1962), Victory in 
Nubia (December 1964), “Dismantling Abu 
Simbel” (November 1965), “Rameses finds 
a New Home” (February 1967), The Greatest 
Archaeological Rescue Operation of all Time 
(February-March 1980) − thus echoing one 
of the greatest victories of international 
solidarity, as the title of an article in the 
August-September 1971 issue suggests.
At the time, the Courier’s collaborators 
included Albert Einstein, Claude 
Lévi-Strauss, Jorge Amado, Bertrand 
Russell, Robert Capa – I discovered who 
they were, what they did and what 
they thought, by reading the journal. 
They enabled me, as the watchword of 
the UNESCO Courier professed back then, 
to look through “an open window onto 
the world”.
When, in the mid-1960s, I started university 
life to study engineering and mathematics, 
I dedicated much of my time to union 
activities and the university’s management, 
and stopped regularly reading the Courier. 
But fortunately, in spite of the vagaries 
of my country’s history, I managed to save 
nearly all the issues I had − bound together 
with a system of metal wires that would 
seem slightly outdated today. 
As for the Courier, it continued its existence 
until 2001, when its monthly publication 
stopped. A lack of financing and 
support forced it to close down in 2011. 
We thought that was the end of it.
A call to humankind
But five years later, the magazine 
reappeared. The first issue of the revived 
Courier was published in April 2017, 
with the motto: “Several Voices, One World”. 
Now a quarterly, it continues to enrich 
the collection. You can access the entire 
collection, from 1948 to the present, 
in the digital archives. Most of the archives 
are available in English, Spanish and 
French, but issues from the last few years 
can be found in many more languages on 
the journal’s website. It is worth the detour. 
I recommend it. Reading the Courier, 
you will discover a serious vision of 
the major current issues facing humanity. 
Its massive ambition – it is one of 
the greatest past and current merits of 
UNESCO – is to promote links between 
various forms of thought, different 
ways of looking at problems, and a call 
to humankind.©

The UNESCO Courier, December 1964.
To reiterate what I have already stated, 
the journal’s major contribution is the 
promotion of a culture which encompasses 
both a diversity of opinions and respect. 
This is the culture − and I say this with 
the utmost sincerity, recalling my family 
background − I acquired by reading the 
Courier with passion and enthusiasm. 
I was a young boy who was eager to learn, 
and through its pages, I found a source 
to do so. This is why I write these lines.
The importance of UNESCO and its Courier 
in today’s world, and tomorrow’s, is even 
more significant, as the fundamental 
principles of the Organization’s Constitution 
are being put to the test by those who 
promote “the mutual incomprehension 
between peoples” and contradict 
these principles “by exploiting ignorance 
and prejudice”. Let us not forget this.

Roberto Markarian (Uruguay) is the rector 
of the University of the Republic and 
Professor Emeritus at the Rafael Laguardia 
Institute of Mathematics and Statistics 
(IMERL) in the university’s Faculty 
of Engineering. He has extensive experience 
of trade unionism, first as a student 
and then as a teacher. He was imprisoned 
for political reasons, from 1976 to 1982, 
during the military dictatorship in Uruguay.  
On the occasion of UNESCO’s 70th 
Anniversary Celebration in 2015, 
Markarian spoke on the topic 
“70 years of UNESCO and its impact 
on Latin America” in Montevideo, 
during which he highlighted the role 
of the UNESCO Courier.
The year 2018 marks the 50th anniversary 
of the completion of the Abu Simbel 
heritage safeguarding campaign.
UNESCO 
mobilized 
the whole 
world to save 
the monuments 
of Nubia 
