Qello, aged 13, 
collects firewood from 
the forest, as dawn breaks over 
the village of Dodota Denbel. 
The second of four children 
in a family of farmers, she is 
responsible for most of 
the domestic chores, especially 
since her older sister, 19, 
got married and had a baby. 
© Ignacio Marín

w
An ordinary day in 
the life of Qello
Text: Katerina Markelova
Photos: Ignacio Marín
If Qello, the heroine of this photo feature 
(shot in November 2017) goes to school 
today, it is because she is lucky. Just 30.4% 
of Ethiopian girls of secondary school age 
are able to go to school (UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics (UIS), 2015). 
Qello, who is 13 years old, has already 
taken the first step towards realizing 
her fundamental right to education 
– she has not abandoned primary school, 
like 61% of her young compatriots (UIS, 
2014). But will she be able to enter upper 
secondary school? Only 17% of girls 
(gross enrolment rate*) passed this level 
in 2015. 
In Ethiopia, in spite of a relatively high 
rate of enrolment of girls in primary 
school – 82% in 2015 – only one girl in 
two (47% in 2007) between the ages 
of 15 and 24 years can read, write and 
understand a short and simple text 
about their daily lives. This is the logical 
consequence of an acute shortage 
of teachers – there was one teacher for 
fifty-five pupils at the primary level in 2011.
Will Qello’s little brother face as many 
obstacles during his schooling? He will 
have a slightly better chance of going to 
primary school (the enrolment rate for 
boys was 88.5% in 2015), and secondary 
school (31.4% in 2015). 
Once she returns home with the firewood, 
Qello makes some coffee. 

Qello spends a few minutes on herself, taking a morning wash. 
He will also probably spend one more year 
at school – the school life expectancy** 
for boys was 8.9 years in 2012, compared 
to 7.9 years for girls. 
Even though boys and girls have almost 
equal access to compulsory schooling 
(from 7 to 14 years), the situation 
in Ethiopia is not very encouraging. 
About 2.2 million children and 4.6 million 
adolescents (2015) have had no schooling 
in this sub-Saharan African country with 
a population of 102 million.
Today, 59 million children, or 9% of 
the primary school-aged population 
worldwide, do not go to school. Just over 
half of these children live in sub-Saharan 
Africa, a region with the highest rates 
of exclusion from education. 
Some 17 million of them are girls 
– 9 million girls between 6 and 11 
will never go to school, as against 
6 million boys (UIS).
Gender equality is Target 1 of Sustainable 
Development Goal 4, which aims to 
ensure equal and quality education for 
all, and to promote lifelong learning 
opportunities by 2030. UNESCO, 
as the United Nations specialized 
agency for education, was entrusted 
to lead the Education 2030 Framework 
for Action, adopted in November 2015.  
The main responsibility for implementing 
this agenda lies with governments, 
with UNESCO and its partners providing 
support through advice on coordinated 
policy formulation, technical assistance, 
capacity-building and monitoring 
of progress at the global, regional 
and national levels.
*Gross enrolment rate: the number 
of students enrolled in a given level 
of education, regardless of age, 
expressed as a percentage of the official 
school-age population corresponding  
to the same level of education. 
**School life expectancy: 
the number of years a child is likely 
to spend in the school and university 
education system. 

Five girls share one desk in Qello’s class at the village public school. 
Before she can get to school, Qello has already made breakfast 
and cleaned the house. She is sometimes late, or has to skip a class 
because household chores are a priority. 

Back from school, Qello prepares a meal for the family. Traditionally, domestic duties are seen as essential “training” 
for girls, preparing them for their future lives as wives and mothers. 
“Two‐thirds of Qello’s girlfriends will be forcibly married at an early age. The vast majority of them will drop out 
from school soon after their wedding day,” explains Ana Sendagorta, Director of the Pablo Horstmann Foundation.

Once the dishes are done, Qello fetches water from the community well. Only one well serves 
the entire village, so she often waits for hours in a queue for her turn.
Qello waits for her father to finish his meal before she cleans the dishes. 

Back home, it is time to do the laundry.
The journey back home takes even longer, since the donkey cart is loaded with water. 
The long distances expose many girls to physical or sexual violence, but they have no choice. 
Their families depend on the water. 

By the time all the chores are done, it is the end of the day. Qello finally finds some time 
do her homework, by the light of a small lamp.
Night shrouds Qello’s house 
in darkness, though stars light the sky. 
Tomorrow is another day.
