
At festive celebrations or solemn 
occasions, women traditionally perform 
songs together, while other members 
of the community, including men, are 
expected to remain silent and listen. 
Many of these female choirs, which 
sometimes perform for hours, have 
included songs condemning domestic 
violence in their repertoire. Publicly 
confronting the men in this way has 
proven to be far more effective than any 
recourse to formal justice – according to 
research conducted by the Cross Cultural 
Human Rights Centre, established by 
Chinese, African and European academics 
in Beijing, China, in 2014.
Another example of the effectiveness 
and social legitimacy of non-state 
mechanisms has been identified in India, 
where Nari Adalats, or women's courts, 
have been established in rural areas. They 
are presided over by women who have 
only a basic knowledge of the Indian 
Penal Code, but use mediation to resolve 
cases. In spite of some flaws, the informal 
courts are a good alternative to the 
lengthy and expensive procedures of the 
official courts – they receive local support 
and funding from the Indian government.
Initiatives that emerge from the cultural 
communities themselves are likely to be 
more sustainable and effective in the long 
run, than changes imposed by external 
actors or by the state. These systems that 
serve to protect communities need to be 
taken into account.
Different forms of 
thinking
Seventy years ago, UNESCO was 
saying exactly that, when it stated: 
“Such a Declaration (of human 
rights) depends, however, not only 
on the authority by which rights are 
safeguarded and advanced, but also 
on the common understanding which 
makes the proclamation feasible and 
the faith practicable.”
The Gacaca courts, which joined the 
process of national reconciliation 
following the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, 
are another well-known example of the 
use of traditional mechanisms. But there 
are many others.
Community alternatives
The Manden Charter, for example, 
is considered one of the oldest 
constitutions in the world, although it 
is oral and transmitted from generation 
to generation. Proclaimed at the 
beginning of the thirteenth century 
by the Mandingo Empire – which 
extended over a large part of West 
Africa in the Middle Ages – the Charter 
is composed of a “preamble” and seven 
“chapters” advocating social peace in 
diversity, the inviolability of the human 
person, education, the integrity of the 
motherland, food security, the abolition 
of slavery by razzia (a raid) and the 
freedom of expression and enterprise. 
These principles, that define the rights 
and duties of members of the Mandingo 
community, are still in force and are 
supported by the local and national 
authorities in Mali.
The Charter was inscribed by UNESCO on 
the Representative List of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2009 
because it represents an eloquent 
example of traditional social and 
legal organization – which should not 
be forgotten.
At the other end of Africa, a community 
solution that has been established in 
Swaziland also merits our full attention. In 
this country, as in many others, a woman 
who is a victim of domestic violence has 
only one option to defend herself: to go 
to the police and file a report. But this 
is counter-productive, because if the 
husband is convicted, the breadwinner 
of the entire family ends up behind bars. 
This is why women have developed an 
alternative strategy. 


Human rights and
cultural
perspectives
Lionel Veer and Annemarie Dezentje
The current debates that 
question the universality of 
the Declaration of Human 
Rights are bringing to the fore 
the initiatives that UNESCO 
has been taking since 1947, to 
encourage the discussion on 
diverse cultural horizons.
Today, the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights (UDHR) is widely accepted 
by most States and is an integral part 
of international law. Even so, it must be 
recognized that the global scene has 
changed since the Declaration’s adoption 
in 1948. Not only is the composition of 
the United Nations General Assembly 
more diverse, but States are no longer 
the only political actors. They must now 
deal with supranational, transnational 
and local actors who generate, 
reconstruct or challenge existing 
normative assumptions. 
Moreover, international human rights 
law is not the only normative order. There 
are other non-legal options, such as 
customary, religious, social and cultural 
norms, which are invoked to uphold 
fundamental human rights. 
In many African societies and some Asian 
countries, the rights and duties of human 
beings are observed in relation to the 
community rather than the individual. 
While liberalism focuses on the inviolable 
rights of the individual, Confucianism in 
China, for example, is more concerned 
with communal duties. In Africa, the 
ubuntu philosophy, based on notions 
of humanity and fraternity, inspired the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
in South Africa. 

As evidenced in an earlier document, the 
Human Rights Memorandum of 27 March 
1947 [p. 6], UNESCO believed that “We 
must not…neglect the fact that in other 
parts of the world other human rights 
theories have emerged, are emerging, or 
are destined to emerge”.
After citing fascism as the perfect example 
of a political system that is theoretically 
unsustainable and has been completely 
discredited and defeated in practice, the 
Memorandum suggests that “a quite new 
formulation of human rights would be 
required to embody the views of a man 
like Mahatma Gandhi, or those numerous 
Indian thinkers who believe in the social 
importance and individual value of 
meditation and mystical experience.”
The document concluded that “we can 
be reasonably sure that the ferment of 
thought now apparent in the peoples of 
black and brown and yellow skin-colour, 
from Africa to the Far East, is destined to 
result in still other formulations.”
In spite of UNESCO’s efforts to expand 
cultural horizons, Asian or African 
traditions and philosophies were not 
taken into account when the UDHR 
was formulated. Although cultural 
differences were on the agenda, it was 
the Western perception of human rights 
that finally prevailed. It is based on 
the political philosophy of liberalism 
and focuses on the natural rights of 
the individual rather than on society 
and culture. Moreover, the process of 
claiming and implementing these rights 
is rooted in Western legal culture, in 
which states and legislators play the 
leading roles.
Over the past seventy years, cultural 
diversity, the influence of non-state 
actors and legal plurality have received 
increasing attention. This evolution 
must be taken seriously, so that 
the philosophy of the UDHR can be 
transmitted to local communities and be 
effective in their contexts and culture. 
The current debates on the virtual 
absence of non-Western ideas in 
human rights standards – which 
indicate the unease felt by a part of the 
world's population – illustrate that the 
discussion, initiated by UNESCO in 1947, 
was prematurely dismissed, and that it 
deserves to be reopened today.
Human Rights Ambassador for the 
Netherlands from 2010 to 2014, 
Lionel Veer is a senior diplomat. He 
was the Netherlands Ambassador and 
Permanent Delegate to UNESCO from 
September 2014 to September 2018. 
Specializing in Human Rights 
and International Politics, 
Annemarie Dezentje currently works for 
the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations of the Dutch government. 
This excerpt comes from the report 
submitted on 31 July 1947, under the 
title, The Grounds of an International 
Declaration of Human Rights (p. 1), by the 
committee of experts that UNESCO had 
convened to participate in the process 
of drafting the UDHR. To this end, the 
Organization had launched a global 
survey on the philosophical principles of 
human rights [which is the topic of the 
main section of this issue of the Courier], 
in order to include key elements from 
various traditions and worldviews in 
the debate.
This document also affirmed the 
Organization's conviction that “the 
deeper the re-examination of the bases of 
human rights, the greater are the hopes 
that emerge as possible” [p. 3]. It also 
cautioned against the risk that differences 
in interpretation, linked to the diversity of 
cultures, could hinder the agreement and 
the implementation of the rights set out 
in the UDHR.
A poster by German artist Sarah 
Hartwig, one of the participants in the 
One for all, all for one! competition, 
organized in 2018 by the non-profit, 
4tomorrow, to celebrate the seventieth 
anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights.
