Francisca Chagas dos Santos in 
Rio Branco, Brazil, March 2015. 
Photo from the Submerged Portraits 
series, one of four parallel elements of 
the Drowning World project started 
in 2007 by South African photographer, 
Gideon Mendel, which highlights 
our vulnerability to global warming, 
through the personal stories of victims. 
The more I read into climate change 
science and eventually, into geology 
and biology, the more I realized that 
how late we have come in the history 
of evolution. And that, not accidentally, 
because complex creatures like humans 
can only come very late in the story of 
evolution. The planet developed life and 
its conditions changed to eventually help 
sustain complex multicellular forms of life. 
This realization jolted me out of my habit 
as a modern historian − mainly of modern 
South Asia and the colonial period. 
Normally I used to deal with a world 
that was not more than 500 years old 
– the news of climate change altered that. 
Like many historians, I used to think 
of the natural world as a backdrop, 
where the main actors were human. 
The assumption within which many 
of us worked − that what matters in 
human history is what humans do to 
one another − didn’t seem untrue, 
but it seemed limited. 
Dipesh Chakrabarty, 
interviewed by Shiraz Sidhva
While modern technological 
advances have allowed us to 
flourish as a species, we may 
have catapulted ourselves out 
of the Darwinian evolutionary 
scene. Human beings have 
acquired the role of a geological 
force, capable of stalling 
an Ice Age – and possibly driving 
another Great Extinction of life 
in the next 300 to 600 years. 
It may not be easy, but, argues 
historian Dipesh Chakrabarty, 
it is not too late to change course.
Humans are a 
geological force 

You have said that anthropogenic 
explanations of climate change spell 
the collapse of the age-old humanistic 
distinction between human history 
and natural history. Could you elaborate?
Until recently, we have thought of human 
history purely in terms of recorded history, 
which goes back a few thousand years. 
A pre-history adds a few more thousand 
years. But climate change science has 
required us to think about the place 
of humans in the history of the planet 
since they appeared. Because you had to 
understand what the planetary processes 
were and how the planet has managed 
to keep in place, not just the climate, 
which is friendly to us, but also oxygen at 
twenty-one per cent of the atmosphere for 
almost six hundred million years.

A lot of history told two stories 
− how humans eventually came to free 
themselves from the constraints placed 
on them by nature and natural causes; 
and how humans came to think of freeing 
themselves from the oppression of 
other humans. 
As I have become aware now, the history 
of our evolution plays a very significant 
role, even in our short-term histories. 
For instance, humans cannot ever make 
any objects that we handle without the 
assumption that we have opposable 
thumbs. This is a matter of a very slow 
evolutionary history, which we usually take 
for granted. So we would talk of what kind 
of swords the Mughals produced, or what 
kinds of knives were used in Baghdad 
– assuming that there’s always a human 
hand capable of holding or wielding these. 
That hand also has a slow history, which is 
the history of evolution. 
What do you mean when you say humans 
exert a geological force today? 
Human actions are now changing 
the climate of the whole planet. 
Taken together, we wield a kind of force 
that is so great that it can change the usual 
cycle of Ice Ages followed by interglacial 
periods – a cycle of, let us say, 130,000 
years. We have somehow acquired the 
role of a geological force − thanks to our 
pursuit of technology, population growth, 
and our capacity to spread ourselves all 
over the planet.
So far we have thought of human beings 
as biological agents, because we do things 
to our environment and to ourselves, 
we carry diseases, etc. We now have to 
scale up our imagination of the human 
− we are actually changing the face 
of the planet. It’s not just its face we’re 
changing − one of the places of the planet 
that human beings have transformed, 
and where our transformation will remain 
for the very long term, are the coastal 
sea beds − through deep-sea fishing, 
mining, etc. We can no longer separate 
the biological agency of humans from their 
geological agency. 
Several historians of the long term 
have suggested that, as we developed 
a big brain and developed technology, 
we began to grow at a pace much faster 
than the evolutionary pace. The argument 
is that if we acquired deep-sea fishing 
technology at the pace at which 
evolutionary changes usually happened, 
then the fish would also have had time 
to learn how to avoid our dragnets. 
But we developed so much faster, 
that our ecosystem didn’t have time to 
readjust. It’s a fascinating idea that this one 
species has kind of catapulted itself out of 
the Darwinian evolutionary scene. And it 
is having such an impact on the history of 
life that many biologists say that we might 
be driving the Sixth Great Extinction of life 
in the next 300 to 600 years. 

Could you explain your thesis that 
the history of capital must be crossed 
with the history of the human species? 
People who study capitalism don’t 
study evolutionary biology. But if they 
did, they might find a species called 
Homo sapiens that was once able to 
invent a modern industrial society or 
capitalism, or whatever you want to call it 
− that became its strategy for taking over 
the whole planet, and dominating life on it. 
The spread of human beings all over the 
planet has only been possible in the last 
few thousand years. Capitalism is not as 
old as us, but if you look at what happened 
with the coming of big sailing ships, 
and then steamships, you can see that 
the continent of Europe itself distributed 
its population all over the world. 
So couldn’t one argue that capitalism was 
the strategy for the species to take over 
the whole planet? Now that does mean 
the differentiation between rich and poor 
people, I agree, but both the rich and the 
poor are members of the species.
Joseph and Endurance Edem with 
their children, Bayelsa State, Nigeria, 
November 2012.

Anchalee Koyama stands in flood waters 
in the Taweewattana district of Bangkok, 
Thailand, November 2011.

Your remark that “the poor participate 
in the shared history of human evolution 
just as much as the rich do” has been 
critiqued by some of your colleagues. 
Could you explain? 
I am as perplexed by Andreas Malm’s 
response to some of my propositions 
that I thought were pretty much 
unexceptionable, as he is by my 
statements. I think the way he interprets 
my quote in his article (see page 24) is 
a little misleading. It gives the impression 
that I had suggested that the poor 
are immediately as responsible for carbon 
emissions as the rich. 
I have never made such a claim, 
for everyone knows that the poor do not 
emit as much greenhouse gases as the 
rich, and that only a handful of nations 
are responsible for the major portion of 
anthropogenic emissions of these gases. 
So that is not the point. 
The point is that Indian and Chinese 
arguments in defence of the use of coal 
and other fossil fuels (though this is being 
somewhat mitigated by the falling price 
of renewable sources of energy) in the 
interest of moving people out of poverty, 
acquire their significance from the fact that 
these are extremely populous nations and 
the number of poor people concerned is 
very large indeed.
The history of population, I suggested, 
belongs to two histories at once: 
the history of modernization, public 
health programmes, modern medicines, 
including antibiotics (in the production 
of which fossil fuels play a role), 
the eradication of pandemics, epidemics, 
and famines, etc; and the history of 
the human species. How could one 
deny that even poor humans belong to 
the species Homo sapiens? Don’t poor 
people have opposable thumbs? Are they 
not part of our evolutionary history? 
Never in the history of biological life on 
this planet have we had a species that 
managed to spread itself all over the world 
(that happened thousands of years ago, 
long before there was mass poverty) as 
humans have, and that also rose to the 
top of the food web in so short (in terms 
of evolutionary time) a period. If we do 
manage to improve the lives of seven 
billion, or eventually, nine billion people, 
the pressure on the biosphere will only 
increase. However, this is not an argument 
in favour of not improving the lives of 
the poor.
What I have tried to show in my work is 
the implication of most human beings’ 
desire to industrialize and modernize. Take 
the examples of Jawaharlal Nehru (India), 
Gamal Abdel Nasser (Egypt), Julius Nyerere 
(Tanzania) and other Third World leaders 
of the 1950s and 1960s. They all wanted to 
modernize their countries − not as people 
who were just fascinated by technology, 
but because they thought it was the ethical 
thing to do. The reason Nehru wanted to 
build dams was mainly to grow more food 
(through irrigation) and save people from 
dying in famines. 
The focus of political thinkers since 
the 1970s has been on human rights and 
on the flourishing of every individual 
human, irrespective of the numbers. 
Climate change and the attendant scientific 
propositions came at a time when we were 
enjoying precisely those things that climate 
scientists say may imperil our existence 
in the long run. 
How much is globalization responsible 
for this?
We have globalized in the last thirty 
or forty years, and this has been made 
possible by increasing the technologies of 
connectivity. We all like the fact that we can 
communicate with our loved ones across 
the globe on a daily basis, or that we can 
fly across the world in a matter of hours 
to explore other countries or do business 
there, or to visit friends and family.

The globalization story means that we 
have actually come to love what could 
lead to our geological end − the capacity 
to impact the planet on a massive scale. 
But in terms of our life experiences, we see 
it as a condition for human flourishing. 
There’s a natural inertia in us, born out of 
historical attachments – to institutions, 
family structures, globalization – and all we 
are capable of thinking of is our immediate 
future. Humans think in terms of seventy to 
eighty years, of three or four generations, 
at most. This makes it very hard for us to 
come together and act in a synchronized 
manner to fight climate change. We see 
how difficult climate change negotiations 
− under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
− have been. Besides, every country is also 
invested in its own development agenda.
Now that we are aware that we are not the 
masters and owners of nature, what kind of 
stories do you suggest we tell? 
I think we should no longer tell stories 
of human hubris. I think the older story, 
that we are controlling nature, was a 
wrong story. The story we should tell is 
that here is a planet, which luckily for us, 
developed complex forms of life. We came 
to be here, and now we know that there 
is a planet-wide climatic system, that 
planetary processes − the geobiological 
and chemical processes − are important to 
our survival and to the survival of complex 
life. For instance, if you destroy soil, it takes 
millions of years to regenerate. 
So we should definitely be less profligate, 
we should somehow find a way of living 
where we live, rationally, intelligently, and 
not consume so much. We also need to 
find some rational, democratic, non-violent 
and poor-friendly ways of bringing the 
population down. 
How we get there is the most difficult 
question today. It’s also very hard in 
today’s world to tell people not to travel, 
or not to avail of the benefits of new 
technologies like smartphones, which 
we know deplete rare-earth materials. 
It is important to acknowledge our 
contradictions − between what we desire 
at the moment and the knowledge 
we have on climate change. 
We need to have a different kind of society 
– we cannot sustain the current kind of 
capitalism for the next 100 or 200 years. 
It’s not wrong to delegitimize consumerism 
and re-educate our own desires. And it is 
our responsibility to keep up this message, 
at universities and schools.
You have said that a crisis is a good time for 
renewed creativity. 
As the crisis deepens, so will the creative 
responses to it. I think there will be 
charismatic leaders who will break the 
shackles of consumerism and inspire us, 
as Mahatma Gandhi once did. 
Dipesh Chakrabarty (Australia and 
United States) is a historian of Indian 
origin. He is the Lawrence A. Kimpton 
Distinguished Service Professor in 
History at the University of Chicago, 
in the United States. He is the author of, 
among other publications, Provincializing 
Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical 
Difference (Princeton University Press, 
2000; 2008) and “The Climate of History: 
Four Theses,” Critical Inquiry, 2009.
Lucas Williams at the hunting grounds of 
the Lawshe Plantation in South Carolina, 
United States, October 2015. 
