Teachers in schools that host refugees 
often walk into the toughest classrooms 
in the world, day after day. A single 
classroom could contain many learners 
who have seen their homes destroyed 
and their relatives injured or killed. Some 
may have disabilities, either from birth 
or as a result of the violence in their 
home countries. They could be former 
child soldiers, survivors of sexual abuse, 
or children whose siblings were not 
lucky enough to escape to a safe place 
like they did. Their education may have 
been interrupted for weeks, months, or 
even years. 
The United Nations Refugee Agency, 
UNHCR, estimates that on average, 
refugee learners miss out on at least three 
to four years of education because of 
forced displacement – making their re-
entry into school a persistent challenge 
for education systems in general, and for 
teachers in particular. 
In 2016, there were 6.4 million school-aged 
children and youth among the 17.2 million 
refugees under UNHCR’s mandate. 



Helping teachers to
help refugees 
Jacqueline Strecker
Fifty million displaced children 
worldwide! This was the 
alarming figure released by 
the United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF) on World 
Refugee Day, 20 June 2018. 
Faced with the trauma and 
interrupted education of these 
children who are victims, 
teachers find themselves 
ill‑equipped to deal with these 
challenges – especially since 
many of them have little or no 
qualifications themselves. Now, 
several institutions in different 
countries are stepping up with 
initiatives to help teachers give 
their best. 

 
Almost 3.5 million of these remain out of 
school – the 2.9 million who are able to 
enrol, often end up in overcrowded and 
poorly-resourced classrooms. At least 
20,000 additional teachers and 12,000 
more classrooms are needed each year to 
address the gap for the world’s displaced 
students alone.
The experience of Chaltu Megesha 
Gedo is inspiring. When she arrived for 
her first day of teaching in the Kakuma 
Refugee camp in northern Kenya, she 
was assigned a first-grade primary class. 
“These were children aged between 
5 and 10 years,” she recalls. “I entered the 
class and I was mesmerized – I did not 
know where to turn because there were 
250 of them!”
In Kenya’s Kakuma refugee camp, the 
scale of the challenge for teachers 
is daunting. Classes of ninety or a 
100 students are common, and classes 
with 200 children are not unusual. But 
help is at hand, with a programme that 
trains refugees to become teachers. 

But even environments that are 
not optimal still present the best 
opportunities for refugee children and 
youth to transform their lives. Teachers 
remain the most likely catalysts for that 
transformation, and require targeted 
support that takes local realities 
into account.
Teachers in these schools may 
themselves be refugees, and have 
often experienced the same types of 
trauma as their students. This is why 
training programmes must address the 
psychological needs of teachers to help 
them grow professionally.
Innovative initiatives
A series of joint initiatives and innovative 
pedagogical approaches to support 
the preparedness and well-being of 
teachers working with refugees have 
been implemented. 
The Teachers in Crisis Contexts Training 
Pack (TICC) is an inter-agency initiative 
that synthesizes existing resources into 
a single comprehensive resource to 
encourage harmonized programming 
between partners in emergency 
settings. The resulting open-source 
teacher-training pack covers five areas – 
the teacher’s role and well-being; child 
protection, well-being and inclusion; 
pedagogy; curriculum and planning; 
and subject knowledge. Each domain 
focuses on building the skills required 
for unqualified or under-qualified 
teachers.
While the TICC was an important step 
towards establishing the minimum 
skills and classroom content needed, 
its development also underlined the 
ineffectiveness of stand-alone training. 
This awareness led to the launching 
of innovative initiatives like the 
Teachers for Teachers and the Borderless 
Higher Education for Refugees (BHER) 
programmes.
Global mentors
Teachers for Teachers is a joint initiative 
of Teachers College, Columbia University 
(United States) and Finn Church Aid, a 
Finnish non-governmental organization 
(NGO), in partnership with UNHCR 
and the Lutheran World Federation. 
It provides teachers with continuous 
professional development, using an 
approach that integrates training classes, 
peer coaching and mobile mentoring.
The training is based on the TICC, with 
teachers following two concurrent tracks 
– a short-term session of four days, and 
long-term training spread over several 
months. In addition, teachers are placed 
into small groups and assigned a peer 
coach who facilitates the learning circles 
and conducts classroom visits to aid 
each teacher. 
Mobile mentoring is perhaps the most 
innovative aspect of the programme, 
providing teachers with a “global 
mentor” available to them via WhatsApp 
and a private Facebook group. These 
exchanges help teachers feel they 
are part of a wider community of 
practitioners with whom they can 
share their experiences and obtain 
teaching advice.
Intercultural exchanges
The BHER programme provides refugees 
and local teachers residing in and 
around the Dadaab Refugee Complex 
(in Kenya, near the border with Somalia), 
an opportunity to acquire recognized 
teaching diplomas and degrees from 
Kenyan and Canadian universities. This 
unique consortium programme brings 
together Canada’s University of British 
Columbia and York University with 
Kenya’s Kenyatta University and Moi 
University, through a blended learning 
approach – combining online learning 
with face-to-face instruction provided 
by professors who visit Dadaab during 
school breaks and holidays.
A compelling aspect of the programme 
is that it enables intercultural exchanges. 
For example, some courses offer refugee 
students in Dadaab the opportunity to 
participate in virtual seminars together 
with students from Mae Sot, Thailand or 
Toronto, Canada. Through these cross-
cultural dialogues, students and teachers 
alike are able to question local teaching 
norms and gain new perspectives and 
ideas from other contexts.
While further efforts are required 
to ensure that all teachers working 
with refugees can be trained, these 
programmes are important examples – 
demonstrating effective and innovative 
ways of supporting teachers, even in the 
world’s most remote corners.
Connected Education Officer at UNHCR’s 
Division of Resilience and Solutions, 
Jacqueline Strecker (Canada) has been 
with the refugee agency since 2012. She 
has extensive experience in the provision 
of education in refugee contexts.
