“I go out by boat six hours a day, quite 
aways – from one side of the lake to 
the other, depending on the weather. 
I see nothing but an endless flat land... 
that’s where my ancestors were. I keep 
warning my sons: “Just look at the land and 
it will tell you the story it has to tell you. 
You don’t want hear it? Yet you can say it by 
heart.” Who is this man who asks his sons to 
listen to the voice of their land and chooses 
to cross a frozen area of over 30,000 square 
kilometres? His name is Raymond Tutcho. 
He lives close to the Great Bear Lake, 
the last large pristine Arctic lake. 
Respecting nature and their elders is 
deeply rooted in the minds of his people 
– not more than 600 souls, almost all of 
whom are Sahtuto’ine Dene. Dene people 
are an aboriginal group of First Nations 
who inhabit the central Northwest 
Territories of Canada. 
Listen to the 
voice of the lake 
Chen Xiaorong
The Bear Lake People 
in the central Northwest 
Territories of Canada have 
taken their destiny into 
their own hands. After decades 
of efforts, they won the right 
to self-governance in 2016. 
That same year, they also 
managed to inscribe their 
territory, Tsá Tué, in UNESCO’s 
World Network of Biosphere 
Reserves. They are on the 
right track to keep alive 
the water’s heart, on which 
their own survival depends.
With this article, the UNESCO Courier 
marks the International Day for Biological 
Diversity, 22 May.

They live in Déline, a small settlement on 
the western shore of the lake. Sahtuto’ine 
means the ‘Bear Lake People’ and Déline, 
‘where the water flows’. Tutcho is chief 
of the new Déline Got’ine government 
(DGG), Canada’s first indigenous, 
public self-government, formed 
in September 2016. 
Unique relationships
The lake has a Tudze, the Sahtuto’ine 
believe. This ‘water’s heart’ beats at the 
bottom of the lake, pumping its life-giving 
waters through the world’s rivers and 
oceans. The pristine wilderness of the Great 
Bear Lake forms the foundation of their 
cosmology, history and traditional law, and 
of Déline’s renewable resource economy.

A constant message from their elders is 
that they must be responsible custodians 
of the things gifted to them by the earth. 
As long as these gifts are looked after 
and kept in good condition, they, in turn, 
will continue to bestow their bounty 
on the people. 
“We have unique relationships with 
the lake and its surroundings that go 
back thousands and thousands of 
years,” explains Charlie Neyelle, Elders’ 
Representative of the government’s Main 
Council. “Some have prophesied that Great 
Bear Lake will be the last place where the 
water will be alive because the water’s 
heart is still beating,” he says, adding: 
“But if we kill it and if it dies, everything 
will die. To prevent that from happening, 
we need to educate people about the 
importance of water.”
“We don’t value money,” explains elder 
Leon Modeste. What the community is 
worried about is that modernization will 
bring more development projects to 
the reserve, upsetting the natural balance.
Managing 
their own lands
Though the elders of Déline have long 
exhorted everyone to live in harmony with 
their surroundings, climate change and 
increasing development pressures mean 
that drawing on traditions and taking 
other measures to preserve their way of life 
has become imperative. 
The community relies on harvesting fish 
and wildlife to provide for much of its 
needs. Its renewable resource economy 
includes limited – but increasing – tourism 
and infrastructure development.
The establishment of the indigenous 
public DGG has helped the economy 
tremendously. Hard-won after decades 
of political activism, self-rule has meant 
that the Déline community now has one 
government, with one set of rules – making 
it easier to preserve their culture, language, 
spiritual practices and land-based way 
of life. 
For instance, when it was noticed that 
the number of caribou dwindled from 
500,000 fifteen years ago to 60,000 due to 
climate change, the DGG introduced limits 
on hunting the animals. “We all honour 
these rules,” explains Leonard Kenny, 
Community Economic Development 
Officer of the DGG. However, other 
animals, like moose, continue to be hunted 
“to a certain extent,” he adds.
Dene’s spirituality includes appreciating 
all the elements of the world. 
Animals, birds, fish, thunder, lightning, 
water, rocks, all possess a living force 
and must be respected. All of nature is 
alive, and everything has its own spirit. 
Thus, by obeying laws and being effective 
stewards of the land, the essence of being 
Sahtuto’ine is retained by the community.
In 2013, Déline elders and key community 
agencies held talks on setting up 
a biosphere reserve. The Tsá Tué 
biosphere reserve steering committee 
was formed the following year. 
The partnership between government 
and non-government organizations has 
broadened the consensus about the critical 
role indigenous people play in managing 
their own lands. 
In March 2016, Tsa Tué was added to 
UNESCO’s World Network of Biosphere 
Reserves. The event was unanimously 
hailed and celebrated by the community. 
“The lake can’t speak for itself, we are 
going to be the voice for the lake,” 
enthused Gina Bayha, a coordinator for 
the biosphere reserve. 
The Tsá Tué Biosphere Reserve Stewardship 
Council, comprised of Déline residents, 
is in charge of biosphere implementation. 
It includes representatives of the Déline 
Renewable Resources Council, other key 
Déline agencies, Parks Canada, elders and 
youth. Decisions of the council are based 
on consensus. 
Spanning an area of 93,300 square 
kilometres, Tsá Tué is the largest biosphere 
reserve in North America. It includes the 
Great Bear Lake on the Arctic, the largest 
lake lying entirely within Canada, and part 
of its watershed within the Déline District 
of the Sahtu Settlement Region.
Huge expanses of pristine boreal forest 
and taiga, rivers and mountains cover 
much of the watershed, which is divided 
into three ecological zones: the Taiga 
plains in the west; the Taiga shield to the 
south-east, which includes the drainage 
area of the Camsell River; and the Southern 
Arctic ecological zone on the north-eastern 
edge of the lake. Within these eco-zones, 
the lands are further classified into 
nine ecological regions and a total of 
twenty-two eco-districts. Each of these 
smaller areas have a distinct combination 
of landforms, permafrost (perennially 
frozen ground), soils, climate and biological 
communities which makes them unique.
The waters of Tsá Tué are largely 
unpolluted, its fisheries are in good shape, 
and there is an abundance of wildlife. 
The animals found here in large numbers 
include the barren ground caribou, 
grizzly bear, moose and muskox, and a 
variety of migratory birds, attesting to 
the high degree of ecological integrity 
in the reserve. 
The people of Great Bear Lake essentially 
live off the renewable resources offered 
by the lake. 

Nightfall at Great Bear Lake.  
The natives believe that Tudze, 
or “Water Heart” lives and breathes 
in the depths of this lake, 
the last to remain intact in the Arctic. 
Don’t let modernity 
kill the heart
Reconciling tradition with modern living 
while ensuring that indigenous people 
can safeguard their economic and social 
well-being is often difficult – with Canada’s 
First Nations people, this is no different. 
Modern life is intrinsically linked to 
modern technologies, the use of which 
depends on the knowledge of modern 
languages. Younger people learn English, 
and gradually lose their connections 
to their tribal language.
According to UNESCO's Atlas of the 
World’s Languages in Danger, there are 
eighty-eight endangered languages in 
Canada. Among them, Sahtúot’įnę Yatį́, 
spoken by the Bear Lake People and 
spread over four communities in Canada 
(1,100 speakers in 2006) is considered 
‘definitely endangered’, which means that 
children no longer learn the language as 
a mother tongue in their homes. It is only 
two steps away from becoming ‘extinct’. 
How then is the knowledge and wisdom 
that elders possess transmitted to younger 
generations? As its languages disappear, 
indigenous knowledge is disappearing too.
On 6 December 2016, Canadian Prime 
Minister Justin Trudeau announced 
his commitment “to enact an Indigenous 
Languages Act, co-developed with 
Indigenous Peoples, with the goal of 
ensuring the preservation, protection, 
and revitalization of First Nations, Métis, 
and Inuit languages” in the country.
The DGG is working on strengthening 
the education system and plans to 
pass their own laws to make sure that 
the Déline are taught and encouraged 
to use their aboriginal language 
at their workplaces.
These efforts reflect both the spirit 
of open-mindedness in Canada and 
a return to traditional sovereignty 
within modernized governance 
structures. It offers important lessons 
for other biosphere initiatives to forge 
new relations of respect, harmony 
and solidarity between humanity 
and the planet.
The Tsá Tué experience, it is hoped, 
will encourage more indigenous 
communities to manage their own 
biosphere reserves.
