where official anxiety about sedition and 
allied offences leads to judicial and police 
practices, which in the metropolitan country 
would be regarded as unusually harsh.
The consequence is that the subject 
peoples as a whole, and particularly 
their more cultivated and better-
educated representatives, exhibit to a 
marked degree, the frustrations and the 
corruptions of impotence. For it should 
not be forgotten that, true as it may be 
that absolute power corrupts absolutely, 
the psychological effects of absolute 
powerlessness are no less damaging.
The general picture of a colony is of a 
territory where economic subordination 
entails political disability; where political 
disability may bring with it severe 
restrictions upon civil liberty and an 
exceptional widening of the legal meaning 
of the word “sedition” (such restrictions 
being at their most severe when the 
metropolitan authorities regard the native 
culture as backward or inferior); and 
Leading Races of Man, by French-
Malagasy artist Malala Andrialavidrazana, 
whose collages use atlases, stamps, 
banknotes and other objects produced 
in the colonial era, to create an artistic 
cartography of today's world.

Human rights for the
colonized
Leonard John Barnes
 “It might be predicted that when colonial peoples set about drafting 
a Bill of Rights, their claims will tally generally with those of depressed 
and disabled groups everywhere, but will also show a special 
distribution of emphasis corresponding to the special character of 
colonial disabilities,” wrote the British anti‑colonialist writer Leonard J. 
Barnes (1895‑1977). An excerpt of his article, “The Rights of Dependent 
Peoples”, sent to UNESCO from London in June 1947, follows.

For this reason, progressive movements 
among colonial peoples tend to assume 
a nationalist and liberationist form. 
They are liberationist because their 
awakening political consciousness sees 
the established constitutional ties with 
the metropolis as emblems of foreign 
domination. They are nationalist because 
separate nationhood is the repository 
of state power, and without state power 
at their disposal, the liberationists can 
neither sever their political and economic 
dependence on the metropolis nor take 
over the administrative functions of 
the metropolis after the severance has 
been made.
We should, therefore, see the colonial 
peoples both as aggregations of 
individuals repressed and thwarted 
by specific forms of disprivilege, and 
as emergent nations struggling to 
attain equal status with the so-called 
independent countries in point 
of sovereignty and international 
recognition. The claim – we emphasize 
this – is to formal equality of status. It is 
not to material equality of function. Nor is 
it necessarily to full national sovereignty 
in the classical signification of the term. 
Colonial peoples object to limitations 
of sovereignty when they are fastened 
on them from without, and appear as 
badges of inferiority. They might well 
accept limitations, provided they could 
do so of their own choice in the interests 
of effective international organization, 
and provided they were assured that 
the majority of other free countries were 
genuinely making the same acceptance.
Such is the position of the dependent 
peoples, and such are their needs or 
rights. The needs cannot be satisfied by 
legislative enactment, nor can the rights 
be guaranteed by constitutional charter. 
Attempts to give the force of unalterable 
law to the claims of particular groups 
or communities have often been made. 
But since no legislators can bind their 
successors for ever, the attempts prove in 
the end either fruitless or superfluous. [...]
 
A British anti-colonialist writer, journalist 
and educationalist, Leonard J. Barnes 
(1895-1977) worked in the British colonial 
office and had first-hand experience 
of colonial rule in South Africa, where 
he was based as a journalist. He is best 
known for his book, Soviet Light on the 
Colonies, published in 1944.

The reflection of 
frustrations
Formulations of human rights naturally 
tend to reflect the major frustrations of 
those who make them. If a right, declared 
and claimed, is to be more than an empty 
aspiration, if it is to serve as “a working 
conception and effective instrument”, 
it will express the natural demands of 
dissatisfied groups and of the have-nots 
of the social order. Liberty is the cry of 
the bond, equality the cry of the victim 
of discrimination, fraternity the cry of 
the outcast; progress and humanity are 
the cry of those whom their fellows use 
as means instead of respecting as ends; 
full employment is the cry of the worker 
whose daily job, or lack of job, stunts his 
soul and mocks his capabilities; social 
planning is the cry of those who are 
trampled underfoot when privilege and 
power strive to make the world safe for 
themselves. That is why declarations 
of the rights of man are strong allies 
of social progress, at least when 
they are first promulgated. For social 
progress is reorganization in the interests 
of the unprivileged.
Hence it might be predicted that when 
colonial peoples set about drafting a Bill 
of Rights, their claims will tally generally 
with those of depressed and disabled 
groups everywhere, but will also show 
a special distribution of emphasis 
corresponding to the special character of 
colonial disabilities. And in fact, wherever 
colonial discontent achieves articulate 
form, it shows a keen awareness both 
of the fundamental significance of an 
equity-less economy, with its necessary 
corollary of political subordination, and 
of the organic connection between 
these and the denials of civil liberty 
common in colonial territories. It is, 
further, ready enough to subscribe to 
the traditional democratic slogans of 
liberty, equality, and fraternity, partly 
because colonial peoples have wide 
experience of being used as means to 
other people’s ends, and partly because 
such slogans are handy for embarrassing 
the metropolitan authorities.
A colonial livery
But all these diverse sentiments and 
attitudes are given a particular colouring, 
they wear a particular livery, distinctive of 
colonial experience. This colour, this livery, 
is the claim to equal rights with citizens 
of the metropolis, the protest against a 
discrimination that appears, to those on 
whom it falls, to be as arbitrary as it is 
comprehensive.
