“Revolution” is not regarded as 
a dangerous word to use, but as a word to 
which high ideals are attached, and it was 
constantly used to indicate a justifiable 
claim by the people to overthrow bad 
rulers; the Will of the People is even 
considered to be the Will of Heaven. In 
the Book of History, an old Chinese classic, 
it is stated: “Heaven sees as our people 
see; Heaven hears as our people hear. 
Heaven is compassionate towards the 
people. What the people desire, Heaven 
will be found to bring about”. 
A ruler has a duty to Heaven to take 
care of the interests of his people. In 
loving his people, the ruler follows the 
Will of Heaven. So it says in the same 
book: “Heaven loves the people; and the 
Sovereign must obey Heaven”. 
When the ruler no longer rules for the 
welfare of the people, it is the right of the 
people to revolt against him and dethrone 
him. When the last ruler Chieh (1818–1766 
B.C.) of the Hsia Dynasty (2205–1766 
B.C.) was cruel and oppressive to his 
people, and became a tyrant, Tang started 
a revolution and overthrew the Hsia 
Dynasty. He felt it was his duty to follow 
the call of Heaven, which meant obeying 
exactly the Will of the people to dethrone 
the bad ruler and to establish the new 
dynasty of Shang (1766–1122 B.C.) 
When the last ruler of this dynasty, Tsou 
(1154–1122 B.C.) became a tyrant and 
even exceeded in wickedness the last 
ruler Chieh of the former dynasty, he 
was executed in a revolution led by 
King Wu (1122 B.C.) who founded the 
Chou Dynasty, which in turn lasted over 
800 years (1122–296 B.C.). [...]



A Confucian
approach 
to human rights
Lo Chung-Shu
“The basic ethical concept of 
Chinese social political relations 
is the fulfilment of the duty to 
one’s neighbour, rather than 
the claiming of rights. The 
idea of mutual obligations is 
regarded as the fundamental 
teaching of Confucianism.” This 
is what the Chinese philosopher 
Lo Chung‑Shu (1903‑1985) 
wrote in his text, titled “Human 
Rights in the Chinese Tradition”, 
sent to UNESCO on 1 June 1947. 
An excerpt follows. 
Before considering the general principles, 
I would like to point out that the problem 
of human rights was seldom discussed 
by Chinese thinkers of the past, at least 
not in the same way as it was in the West. 
There was no open declaration of human 
rights in China, either by individual 
thinkers or by political constitutions, 
until this concept was introduced from 
the West. In fact, the early translators of 
Western political philosophy found it 
difficult to arrive at a Chinese equivalent 
for the term “rights”. The term we use to 
translate “rights” now is two words “Chuan 
Li”, which literally means “power and 
interest” and which, I believe, was first 
coined by a Japanese writer on Western 
Public Law in 1868, and later adopted by 
Chinese writers. 
This of course does not mean that the 
Chinese never claimed human rights or 
enjoyed the basic rights of man. In fact, 
the idea of human rights developed very 
early in China, and the right of the people 
to revolt against oppressive rulers was 
very early established. 
United Nations: Babel of the Millennium, 
1999, an installation by Chinese artist 
Gu Wenda, part of The Divine Comedy of 
our Times project. 
© Gu Wenda / Collection San Francisco Museum 
Of Modern Art, Gift of Vicki and Kent Logan / 
CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 photo by Steve Rhodes
The right to revolt was repeatedly 
expressed in Chinese history, which 
consisted of a sequence of setting up 
and overthrowing dynasties. A great 
Confucianist, Mencius (372–289 B.C.), 
strongly maintained that a 
government should work for the Will 
of the people. He said: “People are of 
primary importance. The state is of 
less importance. The sovereign is of 
least importance”.

Mutual obligations
The basic ethical concept of Chinese 
social political relations is the fulfilment 
of the duty to one’s neighbour, rather 
than the claiming of rights. The idea of 
mutual obligations is regarded as the 
fundamental teaching of Confucianism. 
The five basic social relations described 
by Confucius and his followers are the 
relations between (1) ruler and subjects, 
(2) parents and children, (3) husband and 
wife, (4) elder and younger brother and 
(5) friend and friend.
Instead of claiming rights, Chinese ethical 
teaching emphasized the sympathetic 
attitude of regarding all one’s fellow men 
as having the same desires, and therefore 
the same rights, as one would like to 
enjoy oneself. By the fulfilment of mutual 
obligations, the infringement of the rights 
of the individual should be prevented. So 
far as the relation between the individual 
and state is concerned, the moral code 
is stated thus: “The people are the root 
of the country. When the root is firm, the 
country will be at peace.” 
In the old days, only the ruling class, 
or people who would be expected to 
become part of the ruling class, got 
the classical education; the mass of the 
people were not taught to claim their 
rights. It was the ruling class or would-be 
ruling class who were constantly taught 
to look upon the interest of the people 
as the primary responsibility of the 
government. The sovereign as well as the 
officials were taught to regard themselves 
as the parents or guardians of the people, 
and to protect their people as they would 
their own children. If it was not always the 
practice of actual politics, it was at least 
the basic principle of Chinese political 
thought. The weakness of this doctrine is 
that the welfare of the people depends 
so much on the goodwill of the ruling 
class, who are much inclined to fail in 
their duties and to exploit the people. 
This explains the constant revolutions in 
Chinese history. [...]
A professor of philosophy at the West-
China University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 
the Chinese scholar Lo Chung‑Shu 
(1903-1985) was also a special consultant 
for UNESCO. 
