The image I have of my grandfather is of 
a man surrounded by books. He always 
had a dictionary at hand. In fact, he was 
a polyglot – he had a perfect command 
of English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, 
Italian, Hebrew and Mandarin. I often saw 
him making notes in a big, black dictionary, 
his Chinese dictionary – the language he 
liked the most and ended up speaking 
seven dialects of! Amazingly, in his house, 
we were allowed to write in the dictionaries. 
With him, the book became a living thing. 
Much more than just something to be used, 
a book was like a member of the family, 
inviting itself to our table at any moment 
during the meal.
Sandy was quick-minded, enthusiastic, 
imaginative and curious. He was always 
learning something new, and loved to 
share with his family – and as many others 
as possible – the pleasure of studying. 
Sandy Koffler, photographed in his office 
at UNESCO, in the 1970s.Aurélia Dausse 



Seventy years after the first 
issue of the UNESCO Courier 
was published, we pay an 
intimate homage to its founder, 
Sandy Koffler (1916‑2002), 
inviting his granddaughter, 
Aurélia Dausse, to share some of 
her memories and excerpts from 
his notebooks.
The UNESCO Courier is 70!
Remembering Sandy Koffler,
my grandfather
This is what he did throughout his life as a 
journalist, and particularly during his time 
at the UNESCO Courier.
Sandy passed away in 2002. He left 
behind a treasure-trove, which I recently 
discovered when I started researching 
my family history – his personal war 
diary, his letters, notebooks, photos and 
a complete, bound collection of the 
Courier. It includes many snippets of life 
that describe the remarkable journey of 
an exceptional man. I am deeply moved 
to be able to render homage to him, in 
the pages of the very journal he founded 
and edited for thirty years, from February 
1948 to January 1977.

New York to Paris, 
and back again
Sandy Koffler was born in New York, the 
son of immigrants originally from the 
town of Chernivtsi, in Bucovina, Romania 
(now a city in western Ukraine). Like 
many other immigrants, they arrived 
in the United States via Ellis Island, the 
small island (in New York Harbor) that 
housed the federal immigration station. 
His father, Berl Koffler, after a modest start 
selling soda water on the street, became a 
well-known rabbi in the city. He moved to 
Williamsburg, in Brooklyn, where Sandy 
was born on 24 October 1916. 
After attending New York’s City College, 
Sandy won a scholarship to study at the 
Sorbonne in Paris. In 1940, while he was 
studying in Bordeaux, the American 
consulate advised him to leave France 
because he was Jewish. Passionate about 
French culture and language, he was 
reluctant to go, not least because his love 
life also tied him to Bordeaux. He was also 
sure that his American citizenship would 
protect him. But when the Nazis invaded 
France, he finally went to Marseille to 
board one of the last ships leaving for 
the US. During a lengthy stop-over in 
Portugal, Sandy seized the opportunity to 
learn Portuguese.
Life in New York
Back in New York, Sandy became a 
part-time columnist for the weekly 
magazine America, and also learned the 
techniques of printmaking. Around that 
time, he attended seminars by the French 
anthropologist, Claude Lévi-Strauss, 
at the New School for Social Research. 
Lévi-Strauss had also left France just 
before the Occupation, and the two men 
became friends. 
Several years later, they would meet up 
again in Paris – one as Editor-in-Chief 
of the Courier, the other as one of the 
authors of the first UNESCO Statement on 
Race (1950), and the author of Race and 
History (1952), one of the great classics 
of anti-racist literature. Koffler would 
regularly invite Lévi-Strauss to contribute 
to the Courier during the 1950s, so that 
many of the fundamental articles on 
anthropology were first published in the 
Courier, before being reprinted in books. 
[Editor’s note: a special issue of the Courier 
with most of Lévy-Strauss’s articles was 
published in 2008, with the title Claude 
Lévi-Strauss: The View from Afar.] 
The climate of war motivated Sandy 
to sign up and work for the US Army’s 
Psychological Warfare Branch (PWB). 
He trained at the Office of War 
Information (OWI), a US government 
information agency, which used 
modern mass-propaganda methods to 
disseminate pacifist ideas. He was sent 
to Rabat (Morocco) aboard an American 
(naval cargo) Liberty Ship, which was 
delivering supplies to the Allied Forces 
during the Battle of the Atlantic. There, 
he worked as a correspondent and 
information director for Voice of America 
radio, developing a round-the-clock 
programme of world news broadcasts. 
In 1944, he wrote in his diary: “I can’t tell 
you how much I love this work, I find it 
useful and feel it’s worth it.”
Sandy was then sent to Italy, where he 
set up a newsletter to inform people of 
the advance of the Allies and to promote 
peace. It was called Corriere di Roma, 
Corriere di Venezia, Corriere Veneto, or 
Corriere dell’Emilia (Bologna), depending 
on which liberated city or region it was 
published from.
The Courier is born
At the end of the Second World War, 
Sandy returned to France and became 
interested in this new international 
organization which aimed to foster 
peace through science and culture in 
a traumatized world, and which was 
causing a stir in intellectual circles all over 
the world – UNESCO. Its headquarters 
were in Paris, at the Hôtel Majestic, 19 
avenue Kléber.  
The Organization published a two-page 
monthly black-and-white broadsheet, The 
Monitor, in English, French and Spanish. 
The young journalist and columnist 
offered his services and started work on 
26 October, 1947, days after he turned 31.
It was no later than 19 November the 
same year, that he submitted a proposal 
for a journal – with its editorial line and 
periodicity, an outline of its different 
sections, the number of columns on 
a page, the length of the articles, the 
typeface – to Harold Kaplan, the first 
Director of UNESCO’s Bureau of Public 
Information. In short, a complete project, 
which was to become yet another 
“Corriere” – that of UNESCO. 
“The work of UNESCO is so varied, its 
programme includes such a vast number 
of vitally important subjects in all the 
fields of education, science and culture, 
that it should be no difficulty at all to 
gather lively, interesting articles,” he 
wrote. Ambitiously, he did not want to 
limit the journal’s content to UNESCO’s 
actions alone, but to offer readers 
a review of the international press, 
interviews with leading figures from the 
Organization and the worlds of culture 
and science, and in-depth articles written 
by experts from all over the world. 
Sandy Koffler (second from left) 
with the Courier team, 
at UNESCO's first premises at the Hotel 
Majestic in Paris (1946-1958).

He suggested employing qualified editors 
for the French and Spanish editions, so 
that they would not just be simple replicas 
and the poor relations of the English 
edition. He undertook to “make sure that 
the journal meets the high standards for it 
to be sold to the general public”. 
Sandy succeeded on all fronts, in record 
time. The first issue of the UNESCO Courier, 
an illustrated journal with eight well-filled 
pages, rolled off the presses of the New 
York Herald Tribune in Paris, in February 
1948. A six-monthly subscription was 
offered to an international readership 
through agents in fifteen countries in 
Europe, Asia and America. One of the 
world’s first international journals was born. 
The Courier proliferates
In 1957, the Courier confirmed its 
international reach with the appearance of 
its first “field” issue, published in Moscow. 
The path was clear for other countries 
to follow. In 1960, a German edition was 
started in Bern (Switzerland). In 1961, 
an Arabic edition was launched in Cairo 
(Egypt) and a Japanese edition in Tokyo. In 
1963, an Italian edition followed, in Rome. 
In 1967, two editions, in Hindi and Tamil, 
were launched in India. Between 1968 and 
1973, editions in Hebrew, Persian, Dutch, 
Portuguese and Turkish were added. When 
Sandy retired in February 1977, the Courier 
was being published in fifteen languages. 
In 1988, the magazine’s editions 
reached an all-time high, appearing in 
thirty-five languages. 
For Sandy, multiplying the number of 
language versions of the Courier was a 
way of building bridges between people. 
This is what he said in Madras (now 
Chennai), India, at the launch of the Tamil 
edition: “In the past, nations were self-
centred. In the past twenty years, we have 
witnessed an astounding phenomenon 
of countries looking far beyond all 
borders to the horizons, to every corner 
of the globe, to work together for 
peace and understanding. This is the 
message that UNESCO and all the United 
Nations family is trying to achieve. This 
afternoon, I had the privilege to see the 
Chief Minister [of Tamil Nadu state]. He 
informed me that Madras is prepared to 
go ahead and has given us the green light 
for the production of a Tamil edition of 
the Courier. As the Editor-in-Chief of the 
Courier, my blood tingled when he said 
that, because this is an achievement.” 
On Sandy’s loyalty
Sandy Koffler was indisputably a 
great professional, gifted with solid 
interpersonal skills. A close friend of 
leading figures who have marked the 
twentieth century – such as the Swiss 
ethnologist Alfred Métraux and the 
American engineer and painter, Frank 
Malina, both colleagues at UNESCO – he 
was much appreciated by the first seven 
directors-general of the Organization. 
One of them, René Maheu (1961-1974) 
would say of him that his “talent was 
never separated from his convictions”.
Determined and charismatic, a tireless 
worker in the service of UNESCO’s ideals 
of peace, always watchful to remain 
politically neutral – even as international 
tensions mounted during the Cold War – 
Sandy Koffler had an inflexible character. 
“He never accepted orders, even from 
the highest diplomatic and political 
American officials; he was intransigent, 
and unshakeable and that posed some 
problems for him,” said Pauline Koffler, 
his second wife.
A citizen of the world
In a UNESCO administrative document 
dated 1959, I read about Sandy that his 
“professional competence, his technical 
qualities, his creative faculties, his 
initiative and his imagination make him a 
journalist and chief editor of exceptional 
calibre. He possesses an acute sense of 
responsibility, a profound professional 
conscience, undeniable qualities as 
organizer and leader, and the necessary 
capacity to be a director”. 
Another, much less formal, archive 
document, which is neither dated 
nor signed, reveals another aspect of 
Sandy’s character: “It is true that Sandy’s 
loyalty towards UNESCO, the United 
Nations and their ideals was obvious 
and unshakeable. I remember that every 
year three colleagues – Émile Delavenay, 
Thor Gjesdal and Sandy Koffler – who 
were rarely seen together in town, got 
together on 24 October, around midday, 
in a Parisian restaurant to celebrate their 
respective birthdays as well as, in a special 
toast, the anniversary of the entry into 
force of the Charter of the United Nations.”
For my part, I have always admired 
my grandfather, his intelligence and 
his character. I am grateful to him for 
having passed on his attachment to 
humanist values, his love of books and his 
fascination for cultures of the entire world.
Delving into his personal and professional 
archives has made me want to recount, 
in a documentary that I am working on 
at the moment, the enthralling story of 
this American who loved France and who 
always told me: “I am above all, a citizen 
of the world”. 
Aurélia Dausse is a French-American 
director, screenwriter and actor. 
She studied at Harvard University. 
The cover of the Sinhalese edition 
of the Courier on Minorities, June 1993.
