Covering an area of 7,500 square 
kilometres, the Archipiélago de Colón 
– Galápagos Biosphere Reserve covers 
the entire land surface of the Galápagos 
National Park. 
The Galápagos are one of the best models 
of harmonious and mutually beneficial 
interaction between humans and their 
natural environment. The management 
strategy of the biosphere reserve focuses 
on food production that benefits the 
local economy, respects ecosystems 
and avoids the introduction of invasive 
species that would endanger endemic 
biodiversity.



Galápagos:
where inhabitants
take charge
What do we imagine when we think of the Galápagos? Giant turtles, 
marine iguanas, finches, Darwin and his theory of evolution? Yes, of 
course. But the Galápagos are much more than all that – they are also 
a community of 28,000 inhabitants spread around four islands: Santa 
Cruz, San Cristóbal, Isabela and Floreana. And it is thanks to its people, 
who are invested in the participatory and sustainable management of 
the resources of the archipelago that some 240,000 tourists are able to 
visit this paradise each year. Ecuador’s Archipiélago de Colón has been 
a World Heritage site since 1978 and a Biosphere Reserve listed since 
1984 in the global network managed by UNESCO.
At the fish market in Santa Cruz in 
the Galápagos, March 2018.

Located a thousand kilometres from the 
mainland, the archipelago, home to one 
of the richest marine ecosystems in the 
world, includes thirteen large islands – and 
147 small islands and rocks – that were 
formed four million years ago. Most of 
these are in fact submarine volcanoes, 
some of which rise more than 3,000 metres 
from the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. 

At the heart of the reserve, the Galápagos 
National Park is a successful example 
of participatory management, allowing 
local people to live sustainably from the 
resources offered by activities such as 
fishing, livestock, tourism or recreation, 
through judicious management plans 
that include local food production and 
waste recycling.
To take the example of coffee, a 
cooperative was created in 2015 – 
bringing together farmers, roasters and 
traders – to improve the production 
and marketing of the eight varieties of 
arabica, cultivated for a century on the 
islands, at 250 metres above sea level. 
Renowned for its flavour, Galápagos 
coffee is sold at a price that is seven 
times higher than mainland coffee. The 
pesticide-free production, harvesting and 
processing comply with environmental 
protection rules – which will soon lead 
to the certification of these varieties as 
designations of origin.
The municipal government of Santa 
Cruz island has been developing 
and coordinating initiatives for the 
recycling of solid waste for the last 
ten years. These include launching 
education and awareness programmes 
on environmental problems, banning 
the use of polyethylene materials and 
prohibiting the import of beers and soft 
drinks in non-recyclable packaging.
But all these initiatives owe their 
success primarily to the villagers, who 
take ownership of the environmental 
protection and safeguarding projects. 
Craftsmen use recyclable materials to 
make objects; masons use recycled 
blocks or glass tiles in the construction 
of houses; the fishermen are mobilizing 
for the ban of plastic nets and collect the 
waste that pollutes the sea themselves, 
while all the inhabitants regularly 
engage in cleaning up the beaches. 
Since 2017, half of the solid waste from 
the islands has been recycled through a 
waste selection and recovery programme 
in which the local population is 
actively involved.
Through the Biosphere Reserves as a 
Tool for Coastal and Island Management 
in the South-East Pacific Region 
(BRESEP) project, UNESCO's Man and the 
Biosphere Programme (MAB) is currently 
working – in collaboration with the 
Government of Ecuador, the Galápagos 
National Park and local communities 
– to extend the biosphere reserve to 
133,000 square kilometres, so that it 
includes the Galápagos Marine Reserve, 
a genuine sanctuary for marine life. At 
the confluence of several ocean currents, 
where cold and warm waters mix, it is 
home to a multitude of endemic species, 
but also to species from different areas 
of the Pacific Ocean.
Financed by the Flemish government 
of Belgium, the BRESEP project 
supports the creation of biosphere 
reserves as tools for innovative and 
socially, culturally and environmentally 
appropriate practices. It also encourages 
the establishment of a collaborative 
network for the exchange of information 
and experiences on biodiversity 
loss, coastal zone management and 
sustainable development. The project 
particularly involves the coasts and 
islands of the South-East Pacific, located 
in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Panama 
and Peru. These efforts are contributing 
to improved livelihoods for the people 
of the region.


Waste recycling in Santa Cruz 
in the Galápagos.
