Roads were being rebuilt and new 
settlements constructed to house 
the survivors.
Six weeks after I left, on 18 September 
2017, Hurricane Maria suddenly 
accelerated to a Category 5 system 
– one of the most explosive 
intensifications of a hurricane on record 
– and slammed straight into Dominica. 
Over one night, the green island turned 
brown. The extraordinarily ferocious 
winds simply blew away the forest cover. 
Andreas Malm
Climate change is not 
the creation of the mere 
existence of billions of humans 
who inhabit the planet, 
but is wrought by the few 
who control the means of 
production and make the central 
decisions about energy 
use, argues Andreas Malm. 
In what is more Capitalocene 
than Anthropocene, a head-on 
confrontation with fossil capital 
is imperative if we are to prevent 
extreme climate events 
like the hurricanes that have 
devastated Dominica. 
Dominica used to be an emerald hill-range, 
rising straight out of the Caribbean Sea. 
When I visited the island nation in August 
2017, it remained covered by impossibly 
green woods, every peak and ravine 
bursting with vegetation. The most 
mountainous island in the region, with 
the greatest intact forest cover, it was a 
marvel of natural splendour, but poor. 
Most of the 70,000 inhabitants – the vast 
majority, African descendants – subsisted 
on small-scale farming. The banana, 
plantain and yam were supplemented with 
some fishing and a little bit of tourism.
The island had already suffered an early 
blow. In 2015, Tropical Storm Erika poured 
out torrents of water over the hills, until 
some of them gave way and collapsed. 
At the time of my visit, the country 
was still licking its wounds from that 
disaster, clearly visible in the south-east, 
where the slopes were cut up by the 
landslides that had carried away top-soil 
and trees and houses. 
The view from Dominica: 
Anthropocene 
or
 Capitalocene? 
Incalculable sense 
of loss
Leaves and branches were scattered 
over the sea, naked trunks left standing 
in what looked like clear-felled areas 
– if Erika had scratched the island, 
Maria flayed it. This time the entire 
infrastructure – houses, roads, bridges, 
hospitals, schools – was pulverized 
and the agricultural sector obliterated. 
The financial cost was estimated at twice 
the country’s Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), but, as the IRIN news agency 
reported, “the deeper sense of loss is off 
the spectrum”. 
The Rising Tide, an installation 
of sculptures by British artist, 
Jason DeCaires Taylor, on the River 
Thames, London, 2015.

The Anthropocene narrative is flawed 
because it distorts and obfuscates that 
reality – not by saying that human actions 
have caused climate change, which is an 
incontrovertible fact, but by sliding from 
that observation into the depiction of the 
human species as a unified protagonist. 
It is anything but. 
For the past few thousands of years, as long 
as class societies have existed, Homo sapiens 
has been a deeply fractured entity, and never 
more so than in this rapidly warming 
world – where the world’s eight richest 
men own as much wealth ($426 billion) as 
the poorest half of the world’s population 
combined ($409 billion), according to Oxfam, 
the charity (January 2017). 
In the first month after Maria, a fifth 
of the population picked up what few 
possessions could be salvaged, and left. 
Those who stayed spoke of themselves as 
soldiers on a battlefield: martial discourse 
swept the country. Five days after the 
hurricane, Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit, 
himself now homeless, addressed the 
United Nations General Assembly: “I come 
to you straight from the frontline of the 
war (…). As Dominicans bear the brunt 
of climate change, we are shouldering 
the consequences of the actions of 
others, actions that endanger our very 
existence, and all for the enrichment of 
a few elsewhere.” 
The descendants of the slaves that inhabit 
Dominica had done nothing to heat up this 
planet, and neither had the tiny surviving 
indigenous population. Subsistence 
farmers who resorted to taxi-driving 
or street-vending to supplement their 
incomes, they had negligible carbon 
footprints and zero power over global 
energy supplies. Yet, in the assault from 
the hyper-hurricane, the main victims were 
precisely these farmers: they were killed, 
their lives laid to waste, the very land they 
stood on destroyed. 
Are we all responsible?
In the discourse about climate change, 
as it has developed in Western academia, 
media and policy-making circles over 
the past decade or so, another storyline 
has taken hold. It says that the problem 
has been created by all of us. Global 
warming is the fault of the human species 
as a whole. We live in the Anthropocene, 
the epoch when our particular species 
has overtaken the natural forces in 
determining the trajectory of this planet, 
most obviously in the realm of climate 
– and so humans in general are responsible 
for the ensuing catastrophes. 
An explicit statement of this logic can be 
found in one of the most celebrated books 
on the topic in recent years – Indian author 
Amitav Ghosh’s The Great Derangement: 
Climate Change and the Unthinkable (2017), 
where we learn that global warming 
“is the unintended consequence of the 
very existence of human beings as a 
species.” More than that, it is “the product 
of the totality of human actions over time. 
Every human being who has ever lived has 
played a part in making us the dominant 
species on this planet, and in this sense 
every human being, past and present, 
has contributed to the present cycle of 
climate change.” On this view, the average 
coffee-grower on Dominica contributed to 
Maria merely by dint of belonging to the 
Homo sapiens species. So did her ancestor 
slaves who were brought to the island. So 
did the Kalinago people, living there in 
peace before Europeans made landfall on 
the island in 1492. 
Flawed narrative
It is exceedingly difficult to see what 
scientific grounds there could be for such 
a view, but a multitude of intellectuals 
expounding on the Anthropocene 
have made similar statements. To pick 
just one other case, historian Dipesh 
Chakrabarty (see page 11) , perhaps the 
most influential interpreter of the concept 
in the humanities and social sciences, has 
argued that when it comes to producing 
climate change, “the poor participate 
in that shared history of human evolution 
just as much as the rich do.” (Chakrabarty 
D, 2014, Climate and Capital: On Conjoined 
Histories, Critical Inquiry 41, no. 1, 
The University of Chicago Press Journals.) 
On this view, Maria was more a suicide 
than a blitzkrieg. It was a case of the 
chickens coming home to roost among 
some of their original breeders, with no 
particularly flagrant injustice involved. 
From the denuded hillsides of Dominica, 
the reality, of course, looks very different. 
Follow the Leaders, an installation 
by Spanish artist Isaac Cordal at 
the Exposition Fragil (Brussels, 2015). 
The small sculptures represent 
businessmen half-drowning in a mixture 
of water and oil.

The people of Dominica and their many 
fellows of misfortune around the world 
– set to multiply every coming year 
unless a head-on confrontation with 
fossil capital begins right about now 
– have never lived in what is termed the 
Anthropocene and their actions cannot 
be blamed for causing harm to the planet. 
They suffer the blows from an age more 
appropriately labelled the Capitalocene. 
It is a form of structural, systematic 
war, but we can expect the sudden 
shock-and-awe events to become more 
frequent in the years ahead. A more open 
question is when, or if, the fight-back will 
ever begin. Blaming the human species 
won’t make it happen.
Andreas Malm (Sweden) teaches human 
ecology at Lund University, Sweden. 
He is the author of several books, including, 
most recently, The Progress of This Storm: 
Nature and Society in a Warming World (2018).
Wealth is known to correlate closely with 
carbon dioxide emissions. It is the sign of 
profits from business-as-usual and the best 
proof against its consequences. Soaked 
in fossil fuels, it is the engine of the storm. 
Plastic epidemic
We are being told that climate change is 
created by an anonymous mass of millions 
and billions of humans, when, as American 
geographer Matt Huber has recently 
argued, it is in reality, a very narrow 
segment of the species that controls 
the means of production and makes the 
central decisions about energy use. That 
segment operates with one goal in sight 
– expanding its riches further. The process 
is known as capital accumulation, 
and it grinds on relentlessly, with no regard 
for the fate of Dominicans or the ever more 
desperate alarms from climate science. 
To take but one example, in December 
2017, The Guardian newspaper 
reported that the production of plastics 
in the United States is set to increase 
by forty per cent in the next decade 
– since ExxonMobil, Shell and other fossil 
fuel corporations have used the ongoing 
shale gas boom to invest massively 
in new plastic plants. They will lock 
the American – and by extension, the 
global – economy, even deeper into its 
addiction to plastic products. These will 
eventually make their way to beaches 
around the world, and to fossil fuels, the 
heat from which will find new islands to 
devastate. From the standpoint of capital, 
that is exactly the right thing to do: 
invest in the production and consumption 
of fossil fuels to generate profit. 
It is this process that has fuelled global 
warming from the very start. 
