Radio Kledu

Radio in
pictures:
a detour via Bamako
Text: Katerina Markelova
Photos: Marco Dormino / 
MINUSMA
To celebrate radio in pictures 
– this was the challenge 
successfully undertaken 
by Marco Dormino. The 
photographer, who has worked 
with the United Nations for over 
a decade, specializes in recording 
emergency situations – notably 
in Central America and Mali.
To celebrate its obvious success, 
MINUSMA has decided that World Radio 
Day (13 February) is the ideal occasion to 
pay homage, not only to Mikado FM, but 
to radio in general. Radio has become 
the “main tool for disseminating culture 
and political opinions in Mali,” Dormino 
explains. “It plays a key role in the daily 
lives of Malians.” 
And here is our youthful 41-year-old 
Italian, combing the maze of streets 
in Bamako in search of radio stations! 
A difficult task, as their premises are 
often not in the best locations. “Some 
neighbourhoods in Bamako aren’t even 
marked on the map. It’s easy to get lost. 
In general, I only had a rough idea of 
where I was supposed to be going.” 
In a week, he discovered several radio 
stations in the city – not all, but many of 
which are the most listened to in Mali – 
Kledu, Benkan, Guintan, Jekafo, Chaîne 2, 
Liberté.
Dormino, who joined the United Nations 
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization 
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in 2013, was 
in Bamako when its Mikado FM radio was 
launched in June 2015. This “Peace Radio” 
is broadcast over a vast area in northern 
Mali – home to the independence-
seeking Azawad community, among 
others. Its aim is to provide the public 
with accurate and reliable information 
on all aspects of the peace process in 
Mali and to thus help establish peace and 
national reconciliation. Its name, Mikado, 
was taken from the eponymous game, 
and refers to the power of a people that 
is united. 
Broadcasting in French and Bambara, 
and in other local languages (Fula, 
Songhai, Arabic and Tamasheq) for some 
specialized programmes, Mikado FM is 
rapidly gaining the trust of people in the 
country’s north – becoming the most 
widespread means of communication in 
the Gao region. 
Radio Benkan

Dormano says he always received a warm 
welcome, was given complete freedom 
of movement and had the full support 
of the staff. “I met some very professional 
journalists, who were very well-organized 
and very committed – whether they were 
working for a large public station like Radio 
Chaîne 2, or a small private radio,” he said. 
“They all seemed to be passionate and were 
there because they really wanted to be.” 
By doing this assignment, Dormino 
wanted to get a real feeling for the way 
local people think. This is something he 
always tries to do, wherever he is. “Radio 
is about people’s opinions, their feelings 
and their voices. It is people who bring 
radio to life,” he says. 
 In terms of reception – in regions of the 
world where the absence of transport 
infrastructure makes it impossible to 
distribute print media, and where the 
electricity power supply for television 
broadcasting is at best intermittent 
– a small battery-operated transistor 
radio is all that is needed to access news 
and information. 
In an effort to promote access to 
information via radio, UNESCO, in 2011, 
proclaimed that World Radio Day would 
be celebrated on February 13 every year. 
The date is symbolic, as this was the day on 
which United Nations Radio was created, in 
1946. This UNESCO resolution was adopted 
by the UN General Assembly in 2013. 
Radio is in fact the media that is closest to 
the people. According to UNESCO, radio 
still reaches more people than any other 
media. In Africa, eighty per cent to ninety 
per cent of homes have a working radio 
set. In 2016, more people worldwide 
listened to radio than watched television 
or used smartphones. One does not have 
to be able to read to listen to radio, and 
it can reach very small communities by 
broadcasting in their language. 
Radio continues to be one of the 
cheapest means of communication. 
From the broadcasting point of view, 
a small 40-Watt FM radio station can be 
set up for under $5,000.

Radio Jekafo
Mikado FM
Radio Chaîne 2

Radio Liberté
Radio Chaîne 2

Radio Kledu
Radio Guintan
