It also aims to restore wetlands to combat 
the drying up of water sources and to 
encourage income-generating activities, 
such as the cultivation of spirulina – a 
green algae traditionally harvested by 
women in the region. Other actions 
include the protection of the Kouri cow, a 
species endemic to Lake Chad. 
The project is also designed to encourage 
countries bordering the lake to work 
together so that Lake Chad can one day be 
designated as a trans-boundary biosphere 
reserve. It also intends to strengthen local 
skills, so that these countries can nominate 
sites for inscription on the World Heritage 
List and help identify their Intangible 
Cultural Heritage.
Social cohesion is another key issue 
that the project will address. A series of 
annual meetings – or lake chats – will 
allow residents of all ages, ethnicities and 
religious affiliations to meet and express 
their different points of view. 



UNESCO, on
Lake Chad’s side 
Agnès Bardon (UNESCO)
In February 2018, UNESCO 
launched a major project to 
strengthen the resilience of 
people living in the Lake Chad 
basin, who have been affected 
by a devastating drought for 
the last four decades. 
The BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake 
Chad (BIOPALT) project has set itself an 
ambitious objective – to enable local 
inhabitants to live and work peacefully 
on the shores of Lake Chad. Presented 
by UNESCO on 26 February 2018 at 
an international conference in Abuja, 
Nigeria, the project aims to take stock of 
the region’s natural resources so that they 
can be managed more sustainably. Pilot 
actions to restore various ecosystems 
and foster the development of a green 
economy will also be carried out. 
The challenges are enormous. The Lake 
Chad basin is a freshwater source for over 
40 million people.  
The Dagalou community fishery 
in Sara-Sara on the Waza-Logone 
flood-plain, Cameroon.

Reduced rainfall between 1960 and 1985 
caused the surface area of the lake to 
shrink by more than ninety per cent. This 
dramatic drying-up of the lake has had 
major consequences for the environment 
and the economy, plunging thousands 
of people into poverty and forcing them 
into exile to escape the region, which is 
also plagued by conflicts and insecurity. 
To cope with the scale of this ecological 
disaster, BIOPALT has a budget to match. 
Nearly $6.5 million have been allocated 
by the African Development Bank, over 
a three-year period, for the five countries 
involved – Cameroon, Central African 
Republic, Chad, Niger and Nigeria. The 
project is being implemented by UNESCO, 
in partnership with the Lake Chad Basin 
Commission (LCBC), the body that 
coordinates the actions of States that are 
stakeholders in the basin’s water resources.
BIOPALT plans to map the water 
resources in the region and rehabilitate 
wildlife migration corridors – especially 
for elephants – between Cameroon, 
Chad and Nigeria. 
