Path of thorns, 2014, by Senegalese 
artist Barkinado Bocoum.
Melville Jean Herskovits
How can individual rights be 
reconciled while respecting 
the cultural sensibilities of 
different human groups? For 
the American anthropologist, 
Melville J. Herskovits 
(1895‑1963), this is the main 
difficulty facing the formulation 
of a world declaration of human 
rights. He elaborates on this 
dilemma in this excerpt from the 
text with the title "Statement on 
Human Rights", which he sent 
to UNESCO in 1947. 
Individual rights and respect
for all cultures
The problem faced by the Commission 
on Human Rights of the United Nations 
in preparing its Declaration on the Rights 
of Man must be approached from two 
points of view. The first, in terms of which 
the Declaration is ordinarily conceived, 
concerns the respect for the personality 
of the individual as such, and his right 
to its fullest development as a member 
of his society. In a world order, however, 
respect for the cultures of differing 
human groups is equally important.
These are two facets of the same 
problem, since it is a truism that groups 
are composed of individuals, and human 
beings do not function outside the 
societies of which they form a part. The 
problem is thus to formulate a statement 
of human rights that will do more than 
just phrase respect for the individual as 
an individual. It must also take into full 
account the individual as a member of 
the social group of which he is a part, 
whose sanctioned modes of life shape his 
behaviour, and with whose fate his own is 
thus inextricably bound.
Because of the great numbers of societies 
that are in intimate contact in the modern 
world, and because of the diversity of their 
ways of life, the primary task confronting 
those who would draw up a Declaration 
on the Rights of Man is thus, in essence, to 
resolve the following problem: How can 
the proposed Declaration be applicable to 
all human beings, and not be a statement 
of rights conceived only in terms of 
the values prevalent in the countries of 
Western Europe and America? [...] 

The disintegration 
of human rights
Over the past fifty years, the many ways 
in which man resolves the problems of 
subsistence, of social living, of political 
regulation of group life, of reaching 
accord with the Universe and satisfying 
his aesthetic drives has been widely 
documented by the researches of 
anthropologists among peoples living in 
all parts of the world.  
All peoples do achieve these ends. No 
two of them, however, do so in exactly 
the same way, and some of them employ 
means that differ, often strikingly, from 
one another.
Yet here a dilemma arises. Because of the 
social setting of the learning process, the 
individual cannot but be convinced that 
his own way of life is the most desirable 
one. Conversely, and despite changes 
originating from within and without his 
culture that he recognizes as worthy of 
adoption, it becomes equally patent to 
him that, in the main, other ways than 
his own, to the degree they differ from 
it, are less desirable than those to which 
he is accustomed. Hence valuations arise, 
that in themselves receive the sanction of 
accepted belief.
The degree to which such evaluations 
eventuate in action depends on the basic 
sanctions in the thought of a people. In 
the main, people are willing to live and let 
live, exhibiting a tolerance for behaviour 
of another group different than their own, 
especially where there is no conflict in the 
subsistence field. In the history of Western 
Europe and America, however, economic 
expansion, control of armaments, and 
an evangelical religious tradition have 
translated the recognition of cultural 
differences into a summons to action. This 
has been emphasized by philosophical 
systems that have stressed absolutes in 
the realm of values and ends. Definitions 
of freedom, concepts of the nature of 
human rights and the like, have thus been 
narrowly drawn.  
Alternatives have been decried, and 
suppressed where controls have 
been established over non-European 
peoples. The hard core of similarities 
between cultures has consistently 
been overlooked.
The consequences of this point of view 
have been disastrous for mankind. 
Doctrines of the “white man’s burden” 
have been employed to implement 
economic exploitation and to deny 
the right to control their own affairs to 
millions of peoples over the world, where 
the expansion of Europe and America 
has not meant the literal extermination 
of whole populations. Rationalized in 
terms of ascribing cultural inferiority 
to these peoples, or in conceptions of 
their backwardness in development of 
their ‘’primitive mentality” that justified 
their being held in the tutelage of their 
superiors, the history of the expansion 
of the western world has been marked 
by demoralization of human personality 
and the disintegration of human 
rights among the peoples over whom 
hegemony has been established. [...] 
A declaration 
with global influence 
The problem of drawing up a Declaration 
of Human Rights was relatively simple 
in the eighteenth century, because it 
was not a matter of human rights, but of 
the rights of men within the framework 
of the sanctions laid by a single society. 

The worldwide acclaim accorded the 
Atlantic Charter, before its restricted 
applicability was announced, is evidence 
of the fact that freedom is understood 
and sought after by peoples having 
the most diverse cultures. Only when 
a statement of the right of men to 
live in terms of their own traditions 
is incorporated into the proposed 
Declaration, then, can the next step of 
defining the rights and duties of human 
groups as regards each other be set upon 
the firm foundation of the present-day 
scientific knowledge of Man.
Known for his humanistic and 
relativistic study of culture, American 
anthropologist Melville J. Herskovits 
(1895-1963) is noted for opening up 
the study of the New World Negro as 
a new field of research. A specialist in 
African-American cultural and social 
issues, he taught at Columbia University, 
Howard University and at Northwestern 
University, Chicago, where he held 
the first chair of African Studies in 
the United States (1951).
Such persons, living in terms of values 
not envisaged by a limited Declaration, 
will thus be excluded from the freedom 
of full participation in the only right and 
proper way of life that can be known 
to them, the institutions, sanctions and 
goals that make up the culture of their 
particular society.
Even where political systems exist that 
deny citizens the right of participation 
in their government, or seek to conquer 
weaker peoples, underlying cultural 
values may be called on to bring the 
peoples of such states to a realization 
of the consequences of the acts of their 
governments, and thus enforce a brake 
upon discrimination and conquest. For 
the political system of a people is only a 
small part of their total culture.
Worldwide standards of freedom and 
justice, based on the principle that man 
is free only when he lives as his society 
defines freedom, that his rights are 
those he recognizes as a member of 
his society, must be basic. Conversely, 
an effective world order cannot be 
devised except insofar as it permits the 
free play of personality of the members 
of its constituent social units, and 
draws strength from the enrichment 
to be derived from the interplay of 
varying personalities.
Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, by the Italian illustrator 
and painter Alessandro Gatto.
Even then, so noble a document as the 
American Declaration of Independence, 
or the American Bill of Rights, could be 
written by men who themselves were 
slave-owners, in a country where chattel 
slavery was a part of the recognized social 
order. The revolutionary character of 
the slogan “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity” 
was never more apparent than in the 
struggles to implement it by extending 
it to the French slave-owning colonies. 
Today the problem is complicated 
by the fact that the Declaration must 
be of worldwide applicability. It must 
embrace and recognize the validity of 
many different ways of life. It will not 
be convincing to the Indonesian, the 
African, the Indian, the Chinese, if it lies 
on the same plane as like documents 
of an earlier period. The rights of Man 
in the twentieth century cannot be 
circumscribed by the standards of any 
single culture, or be dictated by the 
aspirations of any single people. Such 
a document will lead to frustration, not 
realization of the personalities of vast 
numbers of human beings.
