My intention is to think about a major 
crisis – the ecological crisis, which we 
agree, defines the era we are living 
in − by showing how the history of 
philosophy can shed light on it and give 
us guidance on the actions we must take 
to deal with it. More precisely, I would 
like to show how there is continuity 
between the way philosophy helps us 
to consider a policy of humanity and 
the way it illuminates a policy of the 
“humanization of the Earth”, in the 
words of the French philosopher and 
theologian Pierre Teilhard de Chardin 
(1881-1955). I use this expression as 
signifying the duty and the responsibility 
that the human has to act accordingly, 
from the moment he understands that 
nature is entrusted to him and to humanity 
in the future. It forbids me to consider 
myself as “nature’s master and owner”, 
to cite the well-known phrase by the 
seventeenth-century French philosopher, 
René Descartes.On this point, regarding 
a philosophy that is simultaneously 
spiritual and ecological, I would like to 
evoke the ideas of the Andalusian scholar 
Abu Bakr Ibn Tufayl (1105-1185). They are 
masterfully expressed in his magnum opus, 
the philosophical novel Hayy ibn Yaqzān. 
He presents the idea that humans realize 
their humanity fully only when they reach 
ecological consciousness − which allows 
them to simultaneously understand 
the evolution of their own becoming 
and the responsibility which is incumbent 
on them to protect life on earth.
We, the servants and tenants of
Earth
Souleymane Bachir Diagne
To meet the challenge that the global ecological crisis presents 
today, there is an urgent need to draw on humanity’s philosophical 
and spiritual repertoire – because it teaches us valuable lessons on 
the importance of taking care of life in all its forms. Souleymane Bachir 
Diagne draws on this source here, by blending the philosophical novel 
of a twelfth-century Andalusian scholar, African words of wisdom 
and thoughts from Western philosophers. We are not nature’s masters 
and owners, the Senegalese philosopher warns us.
Homo perfectus
The Arabic philosophical fable, after 
its translation into Latin in 1671, 
under the title Philosophus autodidactus, 
and later into English, was a source of 
inspiration for many writers, including 
the English writer, Daniel Defoe, 
the author of Robinson Crusoe. Indeed, 
the Andalusian philosopher’s novel is 
the story of the survival of Hayy, a child 
abandoned on an island that has never 
known a human presence, and who is 
rescued, protected and fed by a doe. 
When the animal dies, he learns to use his 
hands, his practical and then theoretical 
intelligence, in an ontogeny (the origin 
and development of the individual 
organism, from conception to death) 
that recapitulates phylogeny (evolution 
of the species over the ages): the child 
develops into homo perfectus, the insān 
kāmil of Islamic mysticism. 
In other words, he becomes an 
accomplished human who rediscovers 
not only the essence of civilization 
(and especially fire), but also the sense of 
transcendence that leads him to the idea, 
and then to the experience of the divine. 
We find an echo of the Philosophus 
autodidactus in the philosophical debate 
about the tabula rasa, the clean slate 
that represents our ability to know 
before experience begins to record 
our knowledge on it. 
With the Ideas Section, this issue 
of the UNESCO Courier marks 
the celebrations of the World 
Day for Cultural Diversity 
for Dialogue and Development, 
21 May, and the International Day 
for Biological Diversity, 22 May.

Photograph of the Careto man, by French 
photographer Charles Fréger, taken 
during the Carnival in Lazarim, Portugal. 
It is part of the Wilder Mann series 
(2010-2011), which took Fréger across 
eighteen European countries in search 
of images of the “savage man”.
The caliph of God 
on Earth
The first shock that sets in motion the 
practical and theoretical intelligence of 
the child is the question that confronts 
him, plunging him into suffering and 
incomprehension, at the moment his 
mother, the doe, dies − what is this 
thing, life, which has left the body of the 
mother and made her forever deaf to 
her child’s calls? To answer this question, 
Thus we have underlined the continuity 
between the idea illustrated by the novel 
about Hayy and An Essay Concerning 
Human Understanding by the seventeenth-
century English philosopher John Locke.
We should note, in passing, that the 
teaching of the history of philosophy as 
it is presented in most textbooks leaves 
little room for a work as important as 
Ibn Tufayl’s, or for the intellectual tradition 
to which it belongs − this calls for another 
way of teaching the history of philosophy, 
which does not make it a purely 
European matter.
Hayy devotes himself to the practice 
of dissecting dead animals, and then 
attempts to surprise the vital principle in 
living animals by performing vivisections 
on them − not seeing, in his ignorance and 
his innocence, the cruelty of his actions. 
He abandons this research, again because 
of failure. Later, when he attains full 
awareness of self, God, Creation and his 
own place within it and responsibility for 
it, Hayy will understand his responsibility 
to be the guardian of life, in all its forms. 
He will take from nature only what is 
necessary for his sustenance, ensuring that 
the capacity for renewal of life is perfectly 
preserved, and that nature reconstitutes 
what it gives him.
Ibn Tufayl’s insistence on Hayy’s ecological 
consciousness is a philosophical illustration 
of Koranic anthropology that defines 
the human as “the caliph of God on 
Earth”. The word caliph, which means 
substitute, and the best translation for 
which is no doubt lieutenant – or more 
precisely lieu-tenant, place-holder, in 
French etymology – teaches humans 
what they have to be and defines 
their responsibility to watch over their 
environment, namely the Earth. Moreover, 
this word caliph, in spite of what we 
hear today, has in the Koran only this 
meaning, denoting the destination of 
the human. An important message from 
Ibn Tufayl’s book is, therefore, that the 
human is guardian of the Earth for itself 
and for the generations to come, because 
the human is originally the depository 
of what makes him the placeholder of God 
on Earth. Today, we need more than ever 
to heed this responsibility, without it being 
necessarily linked to a religious meaning.

To be the receptacle of what makes me 
a placeholder of God on Earth makes 
me understand that “making humanity 
together” is the opposite of depredation. 
It gives me the duty to look after life in 
general − to think that although animals, 
for instance, do not themselves formulate 
rights that must be recognized as declared, 
these are not any less real to me, because 
my humanity obligates me to them.
Making humanity 
together
I’ll sum up my point in one word: ubuntu. 
This Bantu word gained worldwide 
fame when it was used by South 
Africans Desmond Tutu and Nelson 
Mandela. It literally means “to make 
humanity together” − to create, thanks 
to other people, the human that I have 
to become, and at the same time, create 
“one humanity” with others.
Homme nature, aquarelle on paper 
by Angolan-French artist Franck Lundangi.
© Franck Lundangi / courtesy of Galerie 
Anne de Villepoix 
In my opinion, I am not one of those 
people who go overboard in their 
efforts to bring down anthropocentrism 
– and for whom the different kingdoms 
should be self-represented in a sort of 
“natural contract” replacing the social 
contract. It is not necessary to dissolve 
humanity to forbid it to behave, as another 
seventeenth-century philosopher, 
Baruch Spinoza, wrote, “like an empire in 
an empire” − to make humans understand 
that they are not free nor separate from 
natural necessities. On the contrary, 
we must affirm our humanity, but affirm 
it as ubuntu. Ubuntu is a philosophical 
concept with universal scope and it 
seems to me that it encompasses the 
meaning and the role of the humanities 
− in particular, the philosophical 
humanities. By showing how these can 
enlighten us, I want to emphasize their 
contribution, even their “utility”. But it is not 
a matter of exaggerating what philosophy 
can do, nor of giving in to the imperative of 
the profitability of knowledge, considered 
solely from the point of view of its 
technical implementation – by insisting 
on the use to be made of it.
Instead, when it comes to the thought and 
action required by the major crises of our 
time, I want to show that we can, we must, 
rely just as much on a philosophical novel 
written in the twelfth century in Muslim 
Spain as on Western philosophical thought, 
or African words of wisdom. To meet the 
challenges of changing times, we need to 
revitalize ourselves by delving into what 
humans have thought all around the world 
and at different times.
In other words, I want to recall that 
philosophy, and the humanities in general, 
are what give meaning to an education 
aimed towards the total, complete human 
−the homo perfectus – who is able to use 
the knowledge of history to invent a future 
we must build all together.
Souleymane Bachir Diagne (Senegal) 
is a philosopher, specialized in the history 
of logic and mathematics. He is a Professor 
at Columbia University (New York), 
and the author of several books on 
the history of logic and philosophy, 
Islam and African societies and cultures. 
He received the Edouard Glissant award 
in 2011 for his life’s work.
