A sacred and
universal
character for human rights
It is sad to admit that most men consider 
it their right to challenge the rights of 
others and even fight them. What is 
even sadder is that the present aspect 
of the world does not offer any hope for 
improvement in the near future. 
This should not however stifle our 
aspiration for a world where the 
sanctity of the Rights of Man would be 
an intangible evidence for everybody. 
Humanity has never been able to access 
this kind of happiness unless a growing 
number of individuals pursued with 
fervour, an ideal conceived a long time 
ago, until its accomplishment. All the 
progress of social thought or social 
sentiment that allowed for a life together 
without any discord could have been 
achieved only through the strength of 
such aspirations. 
We must not give that up. 
The heathens could always deny the 
immortality of the soul, and yet the 
believers will not stop to see it as a 
certitude. Even if the pagans were right 
today, the power of faith the believers have 
would one day make the soul immortal.
It will be the same with the Rights of 
Man if we do not cease to believe in their 
existence, even though they may remain 
unknown and ill-defined for a long time. 
The Archbishop could afford to slap 
Mozart in the face, without wondering 
whether he entered the history of music 
by that action. 
Who could guess then that the sense of 
honour associated with the artist would 
assume such proportions in the future? 
Who could have predicted that this 
or that artist would be disgusted with 
life after having surprised himself with 
unworthy thoughts? 
But who could have, on the other 
hand, envisioned that the injuries the 
critics dealt Wagner, Ibsen, Strindberg, 
Mahler, and others would be ultimately 
considered a mark of honour? Without 
such enemies we could not be truly great. 
When then will the rights of man – 
without, of course, preventing people 
from being forced to participate in 
injustice – make others understand the 
shame of inflicting such suffering? [...]
It is tragic that the rights of man are, like 
democracy, unable to defend themselves 
against attacks and against destruction. 
All that could be undertaken on behalf of 
these rights would indeed undermine the 
rights of the aggressor. Just as everything 
that tends to consolidate democracy 
is undemocratic.  
That leaves us only with having recourse 
to persuasion. 
It seems that the rights of man should 
be limited to a smaller number of claims 
that would not render this concept 
too ambitious. 
Most forms of belief are exclusive and 
antagonistic, sometimes even combative, 
provocative, aggressive. It would be a 
suicide for them to be tolerant. Let’s 
think, for example, about the communist 
or fascist States, where belief is a 
governing instrument. 
If there is a difference between the 
common law, the civil law and the rights 
of man, it should be limited to this: 
• The rights of man seek to balance powers 
and resistance even in areas where the 
common law has not yet found solutions. 
• We must find a minimum of rights valid 
for all peoples and all races. 
The task of formulating a Declaration 
of the Rights of Man clearly lies with 
an organization that purports to be at 
the “vanguard” of the progress of the 
common law. [...]
The difficulty of defining the rights lies in 
the opposition of interests we’re about to 
protect. Galileo who questioned Genesis, 
and the Church, which does not admit any 
violation of God's word, both need equal 
protection and both have equal rights. […]
A civilization and a culture based 
exclusively on scientific knowledge should 
put a stop to their progress in order to 
balance competing interests. After long 
centuries, no doubt, because powerful 
forces oppose it; moreover, all the interests 
involved are either unknown or fail to be 
revealed in time. But the study of rights has 
more refined instruments at its disposal 
and more requirements it must meet. 
Which leads us to the protection of honour. 
Arnold Schoenberg
“The heathens could always deny the immortality of the soul, and yet 
the believers will not stop to see it as a certitude. Even if the pagans 
were right today, the power of faith the believers have would one 
day make the soul immortal,” wrote Austrian‑American composer 
Arnold Schoenberg (1874‑1951) in the text he sent to UNESCO from 
Los Angeles on 21 July 1947, under the title “The Rights of Man”. 
“The same will apply to human rights, if we do not cease to believe 
in their existence, even though they should remain unknown and 
ill‑defined for a long time to come," he added. Excerpts follow.

Does the man have the duty to believe 
what is true? Does the right to believe 
what is falsehood deserve to be protected? 
The Ten Commandments are undoubtedly 
one of the first Declarations of the Rights 
of Man that have ever been formulated. 
They guarantee the right to life and 
the right to property; they protect the 
marriage, oath-taking and labour, but, 
as there is only one God, they deny any 
freedom of belief.
“How can I truly love the good without 
hating the evil?” Strindberg asked himself. 
Wherefrom the desire and even the 
obligation to fight evil. 
This is why some believe they must fight 
“bourgeois” art and others, the Palestinian 
style, which is foreign to our race and 
began with the great Adolf Loos. 
The fighter has the will and the duty to 
defeat, the will and the duty to oppress 
the conquered. 
But what is then to become of the human 
rights of those who believe in vanquished 
art forms or ideas? [...]
Is the right to be born one of the rights of 
man? Or is it the right to control births one 
of them? And does one have the right to 
starve those who are born in surplus? 
What do religions say about this? […]
We have there serious problems that 
could turn us into pessimists. 
Nevertheless, we must not give up our 
desire to bestow a sacred and universal 
character to the rights of man.
We have in our hearts the strength of 
desire combined with the intensity 
of creation. 
One of the most influential and 
innovative composers of the twentieth 
century, Austrian-American composer 
Arnold Schoenberg (1874-1951) 
created new methods of musical 
composition involving atonality. Like 
many other Jewish artists, Schoenberg 
emigrated to the United States in 1933. 
He taught at the Malkin Conservatory 
in Boston, and moved to California in 
1934, where he spent the rest of his life. 
He held major teaching positions at the 
University of Southern California and the 
University of California, Los Angeles, and 
became a US citizen in 1941.
A photograph from the series 
Visible/Invisible, 2015, by French 
photographer Flore-Aël Surun.
© Flore-Aël Surun / Tendance Floue
