The UNESCO Courier is 70!
The only journal Nelson Mandela 
read on Robben Island
Nelson Mandela, President of the African 
National Congress and Federico Mayor, 
Director-General of UNESCO 
(1987-1999), at the Organization’s 
Headquarters on 14 October 1993. 
But prisoners could apply to study for 
high school and university courses and 
thus order publications necessary for 
their studies. And so, together with books 
on subjects such as accounting and 
economics, the prison administration also 
allowed in the UNESCO Courier magazine, 
which, for some time, arrived regularly 
from Paris.
The prison authorities, who were mostly, 
if not exclusively, Afrikaans-speaking, 
clearly considered the magazine to 
be harmless reading material for this 
class of prisoners. After spending the 
day smashing stones in the limestone 
quarry, they could retire to their cells 
in the evening and read the Courier’s 
"insignificant" contents.
Nelson Mandela and his fellow political 
prisoners were condemned to life 
imprisonment in 1964. Their first years in 
jail were as intellectually and spiritually 
barren as the terrain of Robben Island 
itself – the prison authorities made sure of 
that. Newspapers, even local ones, were 
not allowed. "The authorities attempted 
to impose a complete blackout, they did 
not want us to learn anything that might 
raise our morale or reassure us that people 
on the outside were still thinking about 
us," Mandela writes in his autobiography, 
Long Walk to Freedom (1994).
Annar Cassam
“Apartheid represents today the 
vilest form of modern slavery. 
UNESCO's patient but tenacious 
and vigorous action ties in 
with the struggle of the South 
African blacks themselves, 
who have shown that with the 
courage of revolt they have 
discarded fear and regained 
hope. If the international 
community is to remain true to 
itself, it must mobilize and act 
firmly in order not to disappoint 
that hope.” This is what Prisoner 
number 466/64 of Robben 
Island, Nelson Mandela, read 
in the Courier, under the very 
noses of the watchful agents 
of the police state that was 
apartheid South Africa.
With this article, the Courier marks 
the 100th birth anniversary of 
Nelson Mandela, who was born 
on 18 July 1918.

It was President Mandela himself who 
recounted this in September 1996 to 
the then Director-General of UNESCO, 
Federico Mayor, in Union Buildings, 
the President’s Office in Pretoria, 
during Mayor’s official visit to the new 
democratic South Africa.
The President explained how pleased 
he and his companions had been to 
read the Courier, through which they 
had learnt about so many subjects they 
had never encountered before – such 
as cultural diversity and mankind’s 
common heritage, African history, 
education for development, and so 
on. These subjects did not exist in 
the apartheid lexicon, let alone in the 
solitary confines of Robben Island. 
Reading the Courier was a way of 
learning about what was happening in 
the real world outside. Nelson Mandela 
was keen that UNESCO’s Director-
General was informed of this. 
I had the privilege of accompanying 
Frederico Mayor on that visit. As 
I listened to the President’s words, my 
mind tried to take in their meaning 
and significance. The Courier, so aptly 
named, was the carrier-pigeon that 
flew regularly from Paris to a remote 
spot in the middle of nowhere in the 
southern Atlantic Ocean – bringing news 
and ideas from the five continents to 
Mandela and his colleagues, under the 
very noses of the watchful agents of the 
police state that was apartheid South 
Africa. Knowledge and ideas grow wings 
when necessary.
Apartheid: no escape
Robben Island was the South African 
Alcatraz, an island penitentiary from 
which there was no escape for the black 
common-law convicts who were sent 
there for life. In the 1960s and ‘70s, as the 
struggle against apartheid strengthened 
and spread, the island became the place 
where the racist government sent its 
most serious political opponents –also 
for life. In reality, the island was a prison 
within-a-prison, for the principal jail was 
mainland South Africa itself. Here, the 
white minority settler community was 
locked inside its paranoia about its own 
racial superiority over the indigenous 
population. Every aspect of existence, 
both private and public, was governed 
by racist laws designed to oppress and 
denigrate the black majority for the 
benefit of the white minority population, 
which was privileged in every way.
In so doing, the ruling class claimed 
to be preserving and promoting 
"European values", in keeping with 
their self-styled "civilizing mission" 
in Africa. Ironically, they themselves 
were complete strangers to those 
values – for they had no understanding 
of concepts such as liberty, equality, 
democracy, fraternity, values for which 
the Europeans themselves had fought, 
across the centuries.
Indeed, UNESCO and the entire United 
Nations system were born out of just 
such a struggle – a decimating war 
against Nazi racism which had brought 
the world to the edge of the abyss in the 
Second World War. In 1945, the lesson 
was learnt that "never again" would the 
nations of the world allow such horrors 
to happen. At UNESCO, these countries 
decided deliberately to “build the 
defences of peace in the minds of men” 
(see UNESCO’s Constitution), by sharing 
and expanding human knowledge in all 
its aspects, especially through the areas of 
education, science and culture.
The apartheid regime, however, learnt 
a different lesson and chose to go the 
opposite way – to promote separation, 
exclusion, deprivation, humiliation 
and violence. For those citizens who 
dared to question and challenge this 
backward ideology, the punishment was 
banishment for life.
Cover of the UNESCO Courier, 
November 1977.

Reading about racism 
on Robben Island
I see Mandela and his fellow freedom 
fighters smiling with satisfaction when 
reading the article on racism written 
by John Rex, British sociologist and 
educationist, in 1968: “The most striking 
instance of racism in the world today is 
that of the system of Apartheid in South 
Africa. Apartheid is not as some people 
may still imagine a serious attempt to 
provide equal though separate facilities 
for all races. It is segregation carried 
through by men with white skins to their 
own advantage and to the disadvantage 
of the black and coloured populations.” 
(The ubiquitous shadow of racism).
Less than ten years later, the massacre 
of schoolchildren by heavily-armed 
police during the Soweto uprising in 
1976 was a watershed in the history of 
the struggle. It brought to the streets an 
angry younger generation of fighters 
against apartheid, revolted by the 
imposition of Afrikaans as the language 
of instruction in black schools.
It also made it obvious to the outside 
world that the racist government had no 
strategy except the use of brute force, 
even against unarmed school children. 
By this time, South Africa had become an 
international pariah state, shunned by 
almost all the people of the world, if not 
by all governments.
In November the following year, the 
Courier published a special edition on 
racism in South Africa, Southern Africa 
at grips with racism, which started with 
these words: “Apartheid represents 
today the vilest form of modern slavery. 
UNESCO's patient but tenacious and 
vigorous action ties in with the struggle 
of the South African blacks themselves, 
who have shown that with the courage 
of revolt they have discarded fear and 
regained hope. If the international 
community is to remain true to itself, it 
must mobilize and act firmly in order not 
to disappoint that hope.”
This issue was unlikely to have been 
allowed on Robben Island, but by then 
the struggle had reached the world stage 
and it was beginning to dawn on some of 
the leaders in Pretoria that they would be 
needing Mandela – sooner or later.
Cover of the UNESCO Courier, 
November 1983. The portrait of 
Mandela was painted by Irish artist 
Louis le Brocquy.
Newspapers are 
more valuable to 
political prisoners 
than gold 
or diamonds, 
more hungered 
for than food 
or tobacco 
Nelson Mandela

As the years went by, Mandela and his 
cause grew in strength and stature, while 
the apartheid regime continued on its 
path of destruction and violence against 
its own black population and against 
neighbouring African states.
Mandela’s long period on the island 
came to an end in 1982, when he 
was brought back to the mainland to 
Pollsmoor Prison in Cape Town, and 
then finally to house arrest and to the 
relative "comfort" of a cottage in the 
Victor Verster prison outside the city. 
During this phase in captivity, which 
lasted until 1990, Mandela spent hours 
"talking to the enemy", as he puts it, 
by initiating dialogue and discussion 
with the more intelligent, less bigoted 
members of the regime, in order to make 
them understand that state violence and 
military action would not resolve the 
growing unrest in the country, and that 
the pressure for change – coming from 
all sides, including from the international 
community – would have to be dealt 
with politically.
Finally, the day which had to come, 
came. On 11 February 1990, Mandela 
walked out of the prison gates, and 
within days, established himself as 
the moral leader of the country. A 
remarkable achievement for a man 
who was not only banished for nearly 
three decades, but whose name, 
photograph and words it was a crime to 
publish! In May 1994, after four years of 
gruelling negotiations with the De Klerk 
government, Mandela was elected the 
political leader of the new South Africa, 
the first president of a democratic, non-
racist society where the ex-oppressors 
live in peace with the majority whom 
they humiliated for centuries.
Mandela’s 
"10,000 days"
The twenty-seven years that Mandela 
spent in prison can been seen in two 
ways – as a terrible sacrifice of the best 
years of a man’s life, and a cruel price 
in absence and loss exacted from his 
family. This punishment is undeniable 
and immeasurable. But Mandela’s 
"10,000 days" behind bars, to use his 
own expression, can also be viewed on 
another timescale – this is how long it 
took for him to convince the racists to free 
themselves of their own ideological and 
cultural chains, to accept that freedom 
and dignity for all South Africans, 
whatever their colour or creed, were the 
ultimate qualifications of a civilized state.
The "white tribesmen" of Africa are 
lucky that Mandela waited those long 
years, that he was there to the bitter 
end in order to lead them, peacefully 
and patiently, out of the prison gates of 
their own minds – out of the delusion of 
separateness and superiority, to a land 
to which they can all belong and from 
which none can be expelled because of 
the colour of his skin. 
Robben Island became the first South 
African national site to join the World 
Heritage List in 1999. If ever there comes 
into existence a world heritage list to 
name those who have expanded and 
uplifted the collective conscience of 
mankind, Nelson Mandela will have 
pride of place on it.
Director of the UNESCO Special 
Programme for South Africa from 1993 to 
1996, Annar Cassam is from Tanzania. 
On 11 February 
1990, Mandela 
walked out of 
the prison gates, 
establishing 
himself as 
the country’s 
moral leader
