Zeinab Badawi in Harare, 
Zimbabwe, during the shooting 
of the BBC’s History of Africa 
series. She is talking to sculptor 
Alan Adam, whose work was 
used in the series to illustrate 
iron-working techniques 
that helped shape ancient 
African civilization. 
© Kush Communications

Your nine-part series on the History of 
Africa has been broadcast on BBC World 
News TV in July and August 2017. What 
inspired you to do it?
Africa has a long, rich and complex 
history. Yet that history is neglected and 
overlooked, and what we are presented 
with often projects a distorted and 
partial picture. This has always troubled 
me. When I discovered, several years 
ago, the General History of Africa (GHA) 
published by UNESCO, I was delighted. 
Thousands and thousands of pages on 
Africa’s history from the beginning of 
time to the modern era, written mainly 
by African scholars. And yet I’d only 
vaguely heard of it.
The thought struck me that surely 
the General History of Africa is one of 
UNESCO’s best-kept secrets! This was 
the starting point of the project.
I have been in the media for more than 
twenty-five years and I have done all 
sorts of things, but I can honestly say 
– hand on my heart – that this project 
is by far the most exciting, the most 
interesting and the most valuable 
project I have ever been involved in.
It is a legacy project and a unique 
project, because never before in the 
history of broadcasting, have we had 
a systematic look from prehistory 
to the modern era of Africa’s history 
– told, I hope, in a compelling way – 
particularly targeting young people and 
particularly targeting Africans. I really 
hope that after they see this, they will 
have a very clear idea of how wonderful 
their continent is, regardless of which 
part of it they come from.
How do you plan to make the series 
accessible to as many people as 
possible? Is it available on the web? 
The series will be made available to all 
African and Caribbean state television 
stations and in Brazil – hopefully in 
several languages – as soon as we have 
managed to translate and put subtitles 
on the episodes. There is a big cost 
implication to doing this and it will also 
take time. The series is not available on 
the web, but it may be in future. It will 
be shown again in 2018, on BBC World 
TV. We are also exploring other options 
for its dissemination.
General History of Africa is an 
academic publication. How did you 
make it appealing for a wide, general 
audience? 
I am a television personality. I have been 
in television for a long time, and I am 
very keen to make sure that this series 
is grounded in proper scholarship. 
Which it is, but it also has to be visually 
enticing. So it is not an illustrated 
lecture. I am very keen on making sure 
that young people watch it. It is no use 
making programmes which tick the 
right boxes if nobody watches them.
I tried to make it fun and accessible and 
visually very colourful. For example, 
if I am talking about the trans-Sahara 
trade, I’ll find a camel market, I’ll jump 
on the camel, I’ll fall off the camel – yes, 
I did! And I’m not very proud of that… 
when I think that my great-grandfather 
was a camel trader.
The key thing that I am very sure about 
is that this project is the history of the 
African people – and not about stones 
and bones and monuments. 



My hyphenated
identity
is an advantage
Zeinab Badawi
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
The British-Sudanese television 
personality – who transformed 
UNESCO’s General History of 
Africa into a nine-part series for 
the BBC, making this treasure-
trove accessible to thousands 
– terms it her “most valuable 
project” yet. This broadcasting 
project is unique because it 
systematically explores Africa’s 
history from prehistoric times 
to the modern era – specifically 
targeting young people and 
Africans. Besides elaborating 
on what it took to make this 
ground-breaking series, Badawi 
also discusses the continuing 
gender hierarchies in the media, 
and the difficulties professional 
women encounter when aiming 
for a work-life balance.

How do you see the gender issue in 
the media landscape today?
There are several aspects to the gender 
issue in the media. The female on-screen 
presence – the kind of role that I have, 
for example; female expert opinion that 
is also sought, when the women are 
interviewees; women in positions of real 
power in media organizations, behind 
the scenes; and the way gender issues 
are covered in the media.
In terms of women’s presence in the 
field, and on the screen, I think that it has 
improved, but the senior roles are still 
predominantly male.
All over the world, including in the 
United Kingdom, the number of 
professors who are women is small 
compared to men. It means that when 
you want to go and seek experts’ 
opinions, they are more likely to be male.
In terms of women in positions of 
power, regardless if it is a Western, 
African or Asian nation, the picture 
is not particularly optimistic. Major 
Western organizations remain very much 
controlled by men. The BBC, certainly. 
You find women in middle and lower 
levels of management, but the high level 
is still very male-dominated.
When it comes to gender issues, 
and how these are covered, that is 
sometimes done in a slightly superficial 
way – especially in countries where the 
assumptions, the prejudices on gender 
issues, are deeply rooted.
You moderated a Leader’s Forum 
at UNESCO in 2011, where you said 
that girls’ education was your “family 
business”. Could you explain why? 
In a sense, yes, it is. I was referring to my 
great-grandfather Sheikh Babiker, who 
pioneered girls’ education in Sudan at 
the turn of the twentieth century, when 
the country was under British rule. At 
that time, girls were not educated but my 
great-grandfather wanted to change this, 
and he started with his own daughters.  
Despite the hostility from the British 
authorities and the Sudanese 
community, he established a school for 
his children in his own house.
He had many children actually. We make 
jokes about him in the family: we say 
that he was so pro-women that he 
married four of them!
More seriously, he was indeed a great 
visionary. He set an example by making 
sure that his own daughters were 
educated, and then they developed 
schools. I grew up with aunts, who are 
now in their eighties, with Ph.D.s from 
Western universities. Presently, one of 
my uncles runs the Al-Ahfad University 
for Women in Khartoum, where girls 
from Sudan, but also from other parts of 
Africa and the Arab world, are educated.
So, when people say that Muslim 
girls cannot be educated because it 
is inconsistent with the values of that 
religion, I am simply astonished!
Your work is time-consuming. How do 
you balance work and family?
It is hard for women as mothers to have 
careers. We are the ones who give birth 
to children, and whatever our profession 
is, that means that there are some 
interruptions to our work. So you have 
got to do what works best for you. But 
if you opt for a longer interruption to 
your career – maybe three, four, five, ten 
years – in order to look after the children, 
you do pay the consequences for that. It 
could mean you are out of the frame and 
you have to reclimb the ladder, while 
others have gone beyond.
Have you experienced this?
Probably. I was lucky because my 
work is studio-based, but I had some 
interruptions to my work, because I 
have four children. It is a lot! Had I been 
childless, I would have probably had two 
or three more years to add to my career 
– who knows.
Of course, we show monuments where 
it is relevant, but we want to tell the 
history of the people. Everywhere we 
went, I was trying to find characters 
who are mentioned in the GHA and to 
put them at the front of the narrative. 
It might be the Aksumite King Ashama; 
it might be the Berber king Juba II, who 
married the daughter of Mark Antony 
and Cleopatra; it might be the Sudanese 
King Piye of Kush, who ruled Egypt in 
the eighth century BC. So this is my 
approach: to always start with a narrative 
that involves the people.
How were the local communities 
involved in this project?
I used local camera crews in each 
country. It is extremely hard work, and 
they were exhausted, but they were all 
thankful, because they were listening to 
the interviews, they were looking at the 
places, and they were learning about 
their country. Some of them said, at the 
end of it: “I had no idea there was so 
much in my country”.
What were the major difficulties you 
encountered during the shooting?
One of the problems was to get archival 
material from the national TV stations. 
They were all willing to collaborate, but 
in the end, you never get anything. Also, 
there was a question of language. I work 
in English, but most people in Western 
Africa speak French. In Northern Africa, 
they speak mostly Arabic. Fortunately, 
my Arabic is better than my French.
I would say the main problem was 
the lack of female interviewees. 
The vast majority of the experts are 
men. So, where possible, I tried to 
speak to women, in order to address 
the imbalance.
The key thing that I am very 
sure about is that this project 
is the history of the African 
people – and not about stones 
and bones and monuments

You often say that you have a hyphenated 
identity. Could you elaborate on this?
Today, everybody is a bit of something 
in Europe, but when you have a badge 
of colour, your multiple identity is more 
evident than if you don’t. I was born in 
Sudan, and moved to the UK when I was 
2 years old. At that time, there were 
fewer people from Africa or Asia living 
in Europe. There are many more now. 
I think that it is really less of an issue 
than it was.
Obviously, I am of a Muslim 
background, but Muslims are a part 
of the European landscape. And I do 
think that when we refer to Muslims in 
Europe, we should say “Muslim Britons”, 
for example, instead of saying “British 
Muslims”. I would switch the name 
and the adjective, like the Americans 
do. They say “Muslim Americans”. The 
difference looks slight, but actually it 
speaks a lot more. It is quite profound 
and it is important to the mindset.
I see my hyphenated identity as an 
advantage that gives me a first-hand 
experience of both non-Western and 
European culture. I don’t see any 
inherent conflict. I just have the feeling 
that I have the best of both worlds! 
Zeinab Badawi was born in Sudan and moved to London at the age of 2. A prominent 
broadcast journalist, she studied at Oxford University and the University of London. 
She was awarded an honorary doctorate by the School of Oriental and African Studies 
(SOAS), University of London in 2011, for her services to international broadcasting. 
Badawi has extensive experience in television and radio, working on a range of 
programmes. She is best known for Hard Talk for the BBC, the hard-hitting programme 
which features the world’s leading newsmakers. She also presents Global Questions and 
World Debates on BBC World TV, featured on both BBC radio and television. 
She is the current Chair of the Royal African Society, a patron of BBC Media Action 
(the charitable arm of the BBC), a Vice-President of the United Nations Association UK, 
and a board member of the African Union Foundation. She is also a member of the World 
Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council. 
Through Kush Communications, her own production company, Badawi has produced 
and presented many programmes, including the definitive TV series of African history, 
in partnership with UNESCO.

Badawi relaxes with two women 
who are residents of a village at 
the foot of the Jebel Barkal mountain, 
during a shoot in Sudan.
