When I was 15 or 16, my father gave 
me a book about the fashion house of 
Chanel. I discovered French haute couture, 
and realized that there is a grammar in 
fashion that I wanted to study. I had received 
different awards for art between the ages 
of 6 and 12, but I did not want to study 
art. I wanted to do something different. 
I wanted to go to London. Over six months, 
the London College of Fashion refused 
my application, but they finally accepted 
me, with many conditions attached.
Bibi Russell: 
Finding magic 
in fingers
Interview by Krista Pikkat (UNESCO) and Jasmina Šopova 
Here, she teaches and motivates the girls, 
some of whom are victims of child 
trafficking, to develop income-generating 
skills. “I can’t believe that in the twenty-first 
century, when everyone is talking about 
women’s empowerment and equal rights, 
we are still selling our girls!” she says, 
pointing out that destitute girls in the state 
are sold for less than $100. “If I have the 
strength to finish this difficult work, I hope 
it will open doors for these girls to start 
a new life filled with dignity and love.”
Russell’s efforts are paying off. On 7 March 
2018, thirty-three girls from the shelter, 
including six Rohingya refugee kids, 
walked the ramp at a fashion show 
organized by the government in Kolkata 
and conceived by Russell. They were 
wearing clothes designed by their friends 
at the Home, who have been trained 
by Bangladesh’s best-known designer.
Since the late 1990s, Russell has been 
working to develop traditional textiles 
and handicrafts, giving a chance 
to thousands of people to rise out of 
poverty thanks to their “magic fingers”, 
as she puts it.
Fashion design was your true passion and 
vocation, though you first became famous 
as a top model. How did a young girl from 
Bangladesh decide to go to a fashion school 
in London? 
At home, my mother used to sew clothes for 
us. My sisters never complained, but I was 
never quite happy with the clothes. 
So when I was 10 years old, my father 
bought me a sewing machine. You can 
barely hold a pair of scissors properly when 
you’re 10, but I started experimenting.
UNESCO’s Artist for Peace and 
well-known designer Bibi Russell has 
achieved a tour de force: thanks to her, 
the humble gamuchas – traditional 
cotton towels that people in South 
Asia generally use to wipe their hands 
and faces – rival the most prestigious 
pieces on fashion podiums all over the 
world. But her real success is away from 
these podiums, in hundreds of weaving 
workshops in her country, Bangladesh, 
but also in Uzbekistan, Colombia, India.
In December 2017, she took part in India’s 
Rajasthan Heritage Week, showcasing 
her khadi collection. The show was 
her tribute to Mahatma Gandhi and to 
the traditional Rajasthani weavers who 
created the homespun cloth.
Russell also participated in 
the Commonwealth Fashion Exchange 
in February 2018, with an exhibition 
showcasing sustainable fashion 
from the Commonwealth countries. 
It was launched at Buckingham Palace 
with the support of the Queen and 
the Duchess of Cambridge. 
The designer with a difference is now 
working on what she calls “a difficult 
and emotionally very engaging project”. 
With the direct support of Mamata 
Banerjee, Chief Minister of West Bengal, 
she has been working at the Liluah 
Home, the state’s largest shelter for girls, 
since September 2017. 
With this interview, The UNESCO Courier 
marks the celebration of the World 
Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue 
and Development, 21 May. 
A young girl trained by Bibi Russell 
in Uzbekistan, embroidering 
traditional designs.

Bibi Russell with craftspeople 
in Rajasthan, India. 
I think parents must teach their children 
more about their culture and traditions 
so that these traditions do not die.
When you returned to Bangladesh, 
you started a small tailor’s workshop, 
which grew into Bibi Productions in 1995. 
Most traditional weavers live in villages. 
Why did you decide to base your company 
in Dhaka, the capital?
I only have one office located in Dhaka. 
I need an office from which we can 
connect to the rest of the world. 
But I spend 99.9 per cent of my time in 
villages. We work with craftsmen from 
different parts of Bangladesh. They are 
not from privileged families, and each 
one of them – starting from the person 
who makes tea in my office – feels that 
Bibi Productions is theirs.
I have done this for the people of 
Bangladesh, and Bibi Productions belongs 
to the country.
How would you define the philosophy 
behind Bibi Productions?
We cannot say that Bibi Productions is 
not-for-profit, but we make very little 
profit. Our focus is on saving and reviving 
the crafts and supporting the craftspeople, 
and on raising their awareness about the 
importance of education and health.
I see the difference since I started 
Bibi Productions in 1994. All the 
people working either in the office 
or in the villages have no more than 
two or three children. They know how 
to better manage the money they 
make, and their standard of living has 
improved. Having come out of poverty, 
they understand the importance 
of their children going to school. 
Education and health is the backbone of 
any economy in any country.
How many people does 
Bibi Productions employ?
We have some thirty people from 
different corners of Bangladesh working 
in the office. There are people who first 
thought they would not have the skills 
and knowledge to work in the office. 
But I am able to recognize people with 
a positive attitude.
In addition, we work with thousands 
of craftspeople. I cannot say their exact 
number, but they are around 100,000. 
You think that’s huge? It is not even one 
per cent of the weavers in the country! 
I wish that I could feel that I have reached 
the first step of the ladder before I die 
– there is so much more to be done. 
In countries like India, Bangladesh, 
Central Asia, agriculture is the most 
important sector of the economy. 
People working in agriculture and 
handicrafts live side by side. I work 
with people who do things by hand: 
Fashion for Development is what I am.
How did the idea of Fashion 
for Development start?
It started when I held my first show at 
UNESCO, in 1996. Designers are very 
rarely given recognition by United 
Nations agencies, but the Organization 
recognized the link between fashion and 
development, education and health. 
UNESCO’s “Weavers of Bangladesh” show 
was covered by twenty-nine television 
channels around the world. It was 
supported by Federico Mayor, the then 
Director-General of UNESCO, and Queen 
Sofía of Spain. If the media made me Bibi 
the model, these two people, who believed 
in me from the start, gave me priceless 
support in my career as a designer. I also 
received a lot of international support. 
Since then, I have been invited to top 
universities in the world, which now work 
on fashion for development, and to the 
World Economic Forum (WEF), because 
they realize the importance of the creative 
economy and the social economy.
After twenty years in the West, where you 
built a successful career as a top model, 
you returned to Bangladesh in 1994. 
What made you do that?
Since I was young, I had a dream. I could 
not understand why Bangladeshi 
people were thought of as poor. For me, 
the country was rich with colours and 
music! When I went to Europe, my dream 
went with me. One day I knew that I was 
mentally and physically ready to go 
back home.
I believed that the people of Bangladesh 
needed me as much as I needed 
them. You need two hands to clap. 
Today, after more than twenty years of 
experience, I know I was right. They know 
I respect them and help them restore their 
human dignity. That is the most important 
thing. On the other hand, they give me 
so much love and affection! This gives me 
the strength to go forward. Nothing in the 
world can take me away from this work.
I have never turned my back on 
my country. My parents always lived in 
Bangladesh, so I returned home regularly 
even when I lived abroad. I was born in 
Bangladesh and spent my childhood there. 
I think childhood has a major impact on 
your life.
I have a wonderful family. My parents 
taught me to appreciate our culture as 
well as the culture of other countries. 
Bangladesh used to be a part of India, 
which was governed by the British and 
the Mughals. Thanks to the education 
my parents gave me, I learned all about 
Greater India and about the culture of 
other countries as well. 

In 1999, UNESCO designated you as a 
Designer for Development. Then, in 2001, 
you were made an Artist for Peace. What do 
UNESCO’s recognitions mean to you?
What I am today is thanks to UNESCO. 
But also, thanks to my work, people realize 
that Bangladesh does not only have 
problems, it is also a wonderful country.
When I was designated Designer for 
Development, I returned home and 
showed the certificate to the weavers. I told 
them that the honour was for them, not 
just for me. You can change people’s minds 
when you respect their human dignity.
Any recognition gives you strength. I am 
a fellow of the University of the Arts, 
London. This recognition is given to 
me for the contribution I have made to 
promoting handloom. I have received 
the highest award from the Bangla 
Academy, Bangladesh’s national language 
authority, established in 1955 on the 
model of the French Academy. And the 
biggest designers in the world have also 
recognized the work I do for development. 
The international recognition helps me 
a lot in my work of promoting Fashion 
for Development.
What defines your work as a fashion 
designer?
Everything we do at Bibi Productions 
is natural and handmade. I have never 
used synthetic fabrics or artificial colours. 
I don’t expect people to wear natural and 
handmade all the time, but even if you 
have four or five outfits, wear them every 
now and then!
My models are inspired by traditional 
design. Of course I change colours, 
I simplify the design, but I never change 
the traditional way of weaving cotton 
or silk. 
Among my biggest sellers are 
my accessories and scarves. My bangles 
are made out of water hyacinth, a plant 
that grows widely in Bangladesh. I now 
have women in six villages making these 
bangles. And my gamuchas are promoted 
by the Spanish actor, Antonio Banderas, 
so I do not need to spend money on 
publicity. I would never do that anyway 
– Bibi Productions is a self-funded project, 
and hundreds of people depend on me 
for their livelihoods.
How has your work evolved?
When I started working in Cambodia, 
I began recycling and today, I have become 
an expert at recycling! In Bangladesh, 
I make things out of what people 
throw away.
I was also inspired by the “rickshaw 
art” in Bangladesh to make spectacle 
frames that I personally wear very often.
But the real “revolution” was brought 
about with our design for young people. 
We do jeans in different colours, saris in 
a different way, modern blouses, etc.
How do you balance your family life 
with your professional activities?
I know married life, I have two children. 
When my kids were around 9 or 10, 
I had to make them realize that I have 
a dream, and that if I do not pursue it, 
I would be frustrated. Today, my parents 
have both passed away, my children live 
abroad, but the craftspeople I work with 
never allow me to feel alone. These are 
ordinary people, who need their wages on 
the first day of the month to pay the rent. 
They are not my family, but they mean 
more than anything to me.  
Since I returned to Bangladesh, I started 
to support street children. I gave them 
some money on the condition they went 
to school. I became their guarantor for 
NGO (non-governmental organization) 
schools, where street children are not 
usually accepted. It was first one child, 
then another – now they are more than 
a hundred! They are my source of joy 
when I am in Dhaka.
Bibi Russell pays tribute to 
the craftswomen of Barmer, Rajasthan, 
whose work was presented at a fashion 
show to celebrate Rajasthan Day 
in the Indian state, March 2017. 
