In 2014, the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (the 
movement for the restoration of justice, 
PTI) the political party which governed KP 
between 2014-2018, jumped into the global 
fray and joined the Bonn Challenge – which 
aims to restore 150 million hectares of the 
world’s degraded and deforested lands by 
2020. Headed by former cricketer-turned-
politician Imran Khan, the PTI ambitiously 
pledged to restore 350,000 hectares of forest 
and degraded land from 2014 to 2018.
More than  
a billion trees
In the short time it had, the forest 
department could not have completed or 
done what the political party had pledged, 
all on its own. 
The model adopted for the BTTAP became 
a business involving local communities. “We 
were able to complete the project in August 
2017, ahead of time!” said Malik Amin Aslam, 
who is currently federal minister and Climate 
Change Advisor to Imran Khan, who became 
the country’s prime  minister in 2018.
Zofeen T. Ebrahim
A billion trees have been planted 
in recent years in the Pakistani 
province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
about fifty kilometres from 
Islamabad, the country’s 
capital. The landscape has been 
transformed, and so has society. 
The fight against global warming 
and the fight against poverty are 
one and the same. 
 Pakistan: 
Green again 
“The cost was estimated to be 22 billion 
Pakistani rupees ($155 million), and it was 
completed at Rs14 billion ($99 million), an 
anomaly for a government-funded project, 
which usually go over budget,” pointed 
out Aslam, who was the force behind the 
initiative. In less than three years, 1.18 billion 
trees were grown.
The four-pronged strategy employed 
included planting new trees and 
regenerating existing forests; ensuring a 
high level of transparency; making this a 
people-centred programme; and taking on 
the powerful timber “mafia” or the illegal 
loggers.
According to Aslam, who also serves as 
Global Vice President of the International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 
sixty per cent of the billion-tree target 
was reached by “natural regeneration 
through community-managed protection 
of the forests”. These forests were divided 
into about 4,000 enclosures, with the 
communities given the incentive of 
collecting dead wood. 
Sitting comfortably on a footstool in her 
backyard under a tree providing her ample 
shade, Farzana Bibi puts a fistful of earth 
from the mound next to her into a black 
elongated rubber pocket. The clucking of 
hens and the lone rooster prancing around 
her tiny green backyard make for a perfect 
pastoral backdrop. Once filled to the top, she 
deftly makes a dip in the middle of the tube, 
lodges a seed in it and covers it with soil.
Idyllic and surrounded by mountains, Bibi’s 
village of Najafpur, in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(KP) province, is some fifty kilometres from 
Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. 
She is among the 400 women who have 
been trained in modern ways to prepare and 
propagate plant nurseries in their backyards 
and sell the saplings to the provincial 
government’s forest department. It is part of 
the government’s Green Growth Initiative’s 
(GGI) Billion Tree Tsunami Afforestation 
Project (BTTAP), to fight climate change and 
pollution by planting trees.
Pakistan’s total forest cover ranges between 
two per cent and five per cent of the land 
area – making it a country with one of the 
lowest forest cover in the region and well 
below the twelve per cent recommended by 
the United Nations. 
Farzana Bibi puts a fistful of earth into 
a rubber pocket. 

They also benefited from green jobs as 
forest nigehbans, or community-assigned 
guards, who protected the enclosures from 
grazing, fire and the illegal felling of trees.
The remaining forty per cent target was 
achieved by employing a public-private 
model of shared revenues and growth – like 
the nurseries being tended by Bibi and 
others. The government was also able to 
extricate nearly 3,000 hectares of its land 
from encroachers. 
The project was lauded both nationally and 
internationally. The World Wildlife Fund for 
Nature- Pakistan (WWF-Pakistan) was tasked 
with carrying out an independent annual 
performance audit of the BTTAP.  Hammad 
Naqi Khan, Director General of WWF-
Pakistan, said the project was “a good step in 
the right direction”.
Tackling unemployment
Meanwhile in Najafpur, Bibi’s husband, 
Shaukat Zaman, joins in to fill the pockets. 
His poultry business folded two years ago, 
after a deadly virus annihilated the entire lot 
of chickens. He has been unable to recover 
the loss and start anew. Between them, they 
are able to fill a thousand  tubes with soil 
and seeds in a day. The completed tubes are 
stacked neatly at the back of the courtyard. 
“We provide the seed and the pockets, they 
get the soil, mix it with organic fertilizer and 
put in the labour,” explained Mohammad 
Tehmasip, BTTAP’s project director.  
Over the next few weeks, Bibi and Zaman 
have to fill as many as 25,000 pockets. In 
about six to eight months, the saplings that 
survive will be bought by the government’s 
forest department for Rs6 per sapling. 
“There’s lots of unemployment in our village, 
so every little bit helps,” Bibi says. Her three 
sons, all graduates, are out of work and help 
tend her nursery.       
“In less than a year, they earn about 
Rs150,000 ($1,060) for running these one-
unit (with 25,000 saplings) nurseries and 
we pay them in three installments,” said 
Tehmasip. The first thing Bibi plans to do 
with the money she gets from selling the 
saplings is to make a proper grave with a 
tombstone for her 20-year-old daughter 
Anam, who died suddenly a few months 
ago. 
“Last year, Anam had made her dowry from 
the money she earned from preparing a 
nursery,” she says, her eyes welling up. 
“I’d never seen so much money in my life; 
my life has changed completely, and all 
that without leaving home!” says 30-year-
old Rubina Gul, bursting with enthusiasm. 
“My son goes to a private school now,” 
she smiles. She and her husband, Sajjid 
Zaman, have been preparing and tending 
to nurseries since 2015. “The first year we 
used our front yard to grow the saplings,” 
Gul recalls, adding that from the profits, they 
were able to set up a bigger nursery in an 
empty plot they owned, and also to convert 
part of it into a shop, which they rent for a 
monthly income. They were also able to buy 
a second-hand van. “We are now able to visit 
the adjoining valleys,” Gul beamed. 
...and now the 10 billion 
challenge 
When the PTI formed the federal 
government in August 2018, the party 
decided to expand the project nationwide 
by planting 10 billion trees. 
Terming it an “upscaled” version of the 
BTTAP, Aslam said it was, by nature, quite 
different, as it dealt with more diverse 
ecological zones, different terrains and 
different managerial models for tree 
plantations.
“The 10-billion-tree tsunami (BTT) is a much 
more complex endeavour, as it traverses 
diverse landscapes and forestry models 
across six regions – from mangroves to 
plantation blocks to natural reserves and 
urban forestation,” he explained. Having 
battled and won against illegal loggers in 
KP, the authorities are ready to confront the 
land “mafia” in Punjab “to make space for 
forests to thrive,” Aslam said.

And they are already walking the talk. 
An hour’s drive from Lahore, at Balloki, 
in Punjab province, the government has 
succeeded in extricating state-owned land 
from those illegally occupying it. They have 
turned it into a nature reserve covering 
1,011 hectares. Using legal channels, 
the government aims to recover twenty 
years of rent arrears for illegal use of the 
land from eighty politicians and landlords. It 
also plans to drive out encroachers from the 
riverine forests and wetlands along the River 
Indus, soon.
Changing mindsets
For those who got this once-in-a-lifetime 
chance to ride the BTTAP wave, it was 
a huge learning experience. “The forest 
department, once considered the most 
corrupt department, went through a 
thorough cleansing. 
The working improved manifold too. Earlier 
there was no monitoring, no accountability 
and the forest officers hardly ever even 
went into plantation sites. All that has 
changed. We may not have had the most 
trained team, but it became, by far, the most 
dedicated and motivated,” KP’s environment 
secretary, Nazar Shah, claimed. 
Next, violators – often from the most 
influential segment of society, and who 
considered themselves invincible – were 
dealt with using an iron hand and penalized. 
All this was only possible because of political 
commitment at the top. 
Many in the forest department said it 
brought about a change in the way people 
in KP started looking at trees. The traditional 
wisdom of conserving and preserving 
forests was revived.  “Today we see a strong 
ownership in the communities,” said Ubaidur 
Rehman, community development officer 
with the KP forest department. “Without the 
community on board, this project would not 
have succeeded.” 
“What makes the BTT special is that it is 
not just about planting trees but about 
changing mindsets and making people 
think differently about the role of trees, 
nature and valuing their conservation. The 
billion trees project helped us change the 
behaviour of people, especially the children 
and youth of KP province, and made them 
value the trees as a natural asset. It did 
that not just within the province, but also 
catalyzed a green political movement across 
the country – which is now more sensitized 
to ecological conservation,” Aslam added.
And though it looked like an “impossible” 
task, especially for a province where the 
timber “mafia” rule was so well-entrenched, 
today, in retrospect, the two most 
important lessons for Aslam were: “Firstly, 
that if you give nature some space and 
a chance to rebound, it does so beyond 
your expectations and calculations; and 
secondly, that nothing is impossible if you 
wholeheartedly commit to it and are willing 
to work hard.”
A Pakistani journalist who covers 
development issues for national 
and international media outlets, 
Zofeen T. Ebrahim is Pakistan editor for 
The Third Pole, a multilingual platform 
dedicated to promoting discussion about 
the Himalayan watershed and the rivers 
that originate there.
If you give nature some 
space and a chance 
to rebound, it does so 
beyond your expectations 
and calculations
Women working in a government-owned 
nursery in Pakistan’s Khyber  
Pakhtunkhwa province
