The Inuit leading the expedition, active 
hunters from the community – Simeonie 
Kavik, Elijah Oquaituk and Lucassie Ippak 
– turned to the biologists and said, “This is 
what we’ve been telling you about. In the 
early 1990s, one of our elders noticed that 
there were as many dead eiders on the 
ice as there was gravel on the beach”. The 
hunters and elders of Sanikiluaq did alert 
the Canadian authorities at the time, but 
the phenomenon escaped the attention 
of the scientific community.
One of the biologists on the 2002 
expedition to study the eider die-offs 
had designed an underwater camera 
to film the eiders as they dove under 
the sea ice to forage in winter. I was a 
Ph.D. student at the time, and spent the 
next two winters at the edge of the sea 
ice – under the guidance of Kavik and 
Oquaituk – collecting footage tracking 
eider survival methods. 
Joel Heath, with 
Lucassie Arragutainaq
An Inuktitut word for sea ice, 
SIKU today refers to a web 
platform that is revolutionizing 
access to the ancient knowledge 
and current research of 
communities living in Canada’s 
Arctic zone. A story that 
began modestly with a few 
snap-shots of eider ducks 
struggling for survival on the 
ice floe has evolved into an 
extraordinary project over 
fifteen years, combining the 
oldest knowledge with the most 
modern technologies. 
Siku: 
It was colder than ever that winter 
day of 2002, in the Qikiqtaaluk region 
in Nunavut, Canada. Not far from the 
community of Sanikiluaq, a group of 
Inuit with harpoons led the way over 
the thin, newly-formed ice. A team of 
biologists cautiously and literally followed 
in their footsteps. The ice fog rising 
from the open water made the scene 
particularly dramatic.
A large floe edge on the east side of 
the Belcher Islands had recently frozen 
over, and a group of eider ducks were 
struggling to keep the remaining open 
water from freezing. This was critical for 
them to dive and access the mussels and 
sea urchins they relied on for food.
The edges of the ice were littered with 
the carcasses of dead ducks that had 
become frozen into the advancing ice. 
The footage was unprecedented. After 
seven years of working closely with 
almost all the families in Sanikiluaq, the 
project resulted in the documentary, 
People of a Feather (2011). The film, 
which went on to win a dozen awards, 
highlights the community’s unique 
relationship with eiders, and the shared 
challenges of environmental change 
that they face.
The Inuit of the Belcher Islands are not 
just interested in eider ducks – their 
life depends on them. While most 
birds, including eiders, migrate south, 
Hudson Bay eiders remain around the 
Belcher Islands through the winter. The 
community use eider skins to make 
traditional parkas and their meat is 
critical to food security year-round, in the 
absence of caribou here. 

Mixing high-tech 
with ancient know-how

Putting together 
the puzzle pieces
It was in the wake of the film’s release that 
the Arctic Eider Society (AES) was formed 
in 2011. The groundwork was already 
well-prepared, thanks to the community-
driven research programmes developed 
with the support of the Canadian 
government’s International Polar Year 
(2007–2008) and to their mobilization, 
dating back to the early 1990s. Around 
the same time, the Sanikiluaq community 
launched a programme bringing 
together twenty-eight Inuit and Cree 
communities across Hudson Bay and 
James Bay, to synthesize their knowledge 
of environmental change. The project 
resulted in the 1997 publication, Voices 
from the Bay, which to this day remains 
a definitive source for knowledge on 
the region. 
An Inuit-driven charity, AES aims to 
empower local people to take charge of 
research, education and stewardship of 
their environment. The early programmes 
focused on assessing changes in 
oceanography and sea ice – training 
hunters and youth to use salinity and 
temperature profilers; establishing time-
lapse monitoring stations and carrying 
out ice-core and water sampling.
The creation of AES’s Community-
Driven Research Network was given top 
priority. It includes Sanikiluaq (Nunavut), 
Inukjuak, Umiujaq, Kuujjuaraapik 
(Nunavik region of Quebec) and Chisasibi 
(Cree community in the Eeyou Marine 
Region of Quebec).  
An eider duck hunter probes 
the condition of the ice.
Each of these neighbouring communities 
held a different piece of the puzzle, and 
by working together they could finally 
provide a larger picture of environmental 
change in the region. 
Drawing academic expertise from 
the University of Manitoba, Carleton 
University and ArcticNet and funding 
from the Nunavut General Monitoring 
Plan (NGMP), the Nunavik Marine 
Region Wildlife Board (NMRWB) and 
the Cree Nation of Chisasibi, the 
network has been able to develop 
partnerships. The increased capacity has 
allowed the tackling of new priorities, 
including those with the Northern 
Contaminants Program, and expanding 
to new regions with funding from Polar 
Knowledge Canada.
New priorities
As capacity continued to grow, 
the communities identified three 
new priorities – increasing youth 
engagement, helping bridge the larger-
scale jurisdictional challenges faced 
by the region, and sharing results and 
coordinating in near-real time.
To involve youth, the network has 
partnered with Kativik Ilisarniliriniq, 
the Nunavik School Board, to develop 
a holistic Inuit-centred approach 
to training and education in the 
sciences. This has resulted in the Arctic 
Sea Ice Educational Package. Using 
interactive multimedia tools, it allows 
young people to partner with hunters 
and to become directly involved in 
local research.
Regarding the second priority, the 
first-ever Hudson Bay Summit was 
held in 2018. It brought together 
twenty-seven Inuit and Cree 
communities from James Bay and 
Hudson Bay, and representatives of 
ninety-seven organizations, to form 
the Hudson Bay Consortium – a forum 
for collaboration and coordinated 
stewardship for a region with complex 
inter-jurisdictional governance. 

To address the third priority of 
sharing data in near-real time, the five 
communities in the network created 
a web platform in 2014. A simple base 
map and corresponding timelines 
were built, with profiles for community 
researchers where the results of salinity 
profiling, ice-core sampling and 
contaminants-monitoring could be 
shared online. 
Not only did this prototype platform 
– initially named IK-MAP – prove 
compelling for data management 
among so many collaborators, it 
allowed each community to use its own 
knowledge systems to interpret data 
and see how their results fit into the 
bigger picture. In the past, the results of 
research programmes would end up, far 
too often, in an academic’s file cabinet 
down south, never to be seen again. 
Today the information is accessible 
to everyone, including tech-savvy 
Inuit youth. New features have been 
added, allowing photos and posts to 
be tagged – not just for individuals, 
but also for wildlife species and the 
Inuktitut terminology for ice types, 
and for measurements, remarks and 
observations of all kinds.
© Qavavau Manumie (Inuit) / Reproduced with the permission of Dorset Fine Arts
Google Street View 
of the Arctic sea ice 
In 2015, AES partnered with Google Earth 
Outreach to develop the first-ever Google 
Street View of remote sea ice – mapping 
not only the Sanikiluaq community, but 
also polynyas and floe edges in winter. 
The platform provided new ways for 
northerners and southerners to explore 
the Arctic sea ice.
The next step was to create a social 
media network and mapping platform, 
specifically by and for the Inuit. SIKU: 
The Inuit Knowledge Wiki and Social 
Mapping Platform was born, and came 
to life with new funding after winning 
the 2017 Google.org Impact Challenge 
in Canada. Siku, the Inuktitut word for 
sea ice, is itself a metaphor of ice as the 
structure of connectivity and change 
in the north. 
Currently in beta mode, the platform 
has brought together a wide range of 
tools and services important to the Inuit. 
Profiles for each community provide local 
weather, tides and sea-ice imagery from 
multiple satellites in near-real time. Its 
official launch is scheduled for late 2019. 
A mobile app has also been developed 
to significantly expand the scope of 
systematically documenting indigenous 
knowledge and observations. 
A new era
Of course, the mobile app is no 
replacement for using a harpoon to 
check the ice or for experiential learning 
through elders. But by combining the 
best of recent scientific approaches and 
centuries of indigenous knowledge, it 
is now possible to monitor dangerous 
sea-ice conditions, using Inuktitut 
terminology around the classification 
of ice, for example. It is hoped that 
this terminology will one day be 
integrated into machine learning 
approaches (artificial intelligence), so 
that indigenous communities can access 
relevant information remotely – in real 
time and in their own language.
Organizations and communities can 
now share their news, reports and blogs. 
Young people can immerse themselves 
in local culture by sharing hunting 
stories and traditional place names. 
Observations that were once typically 
written off as anecdotal by scientists 
can be systematically documented 
and quantified. The data management 
and permissions approach protection 
policy means local populations can now 
be in charge of managing their data, 
intellectual property and how they 
choose to share it. 
The project, which began about fifteen 
years ago with a few snap-shots of ducks 
on the ice floe, is now flying on its own 
– well beyond the winter ecology of the 
Hudson Bay eiders. 
A Canadian scientist and filmmaker, 
Joel Heath has spent twenty years 
in the Arctic with Inuit communities, 
combining his expertise in ecology, sea-
ice dynamics and mathematical biology 
with Inuit knowledge. He is Executive 
Director and co-founder of the Arctic 
Eider Society (AES), an Inuit charity based 
in Sanikiluaq, Nunavut, Canada.
A co-founder and Board Member 
of the Arctic Eider Society (AES), 
Lucassie Arragutainaq (Canada) 
is Director of the Sanikiluaq Hunters 
and Trappers Association. A co-author 
of Voices from the Bay (1997), he is 
responsible for many initiatives to 
mobilize indigenous knowledge.
Transformations by the Inuit artist 
Qavavau Manumie, Cape Dorset, 
Canada, 2011.
