What’s more, even those mayors 
who do support fighting the Trump 
administration’s immigration policies 
are not quite sure about their capacity 
to do so. Only thirty-one per cent of 
mayors believed that they could do 
a lot to counteract or oppose federal 
immigration policy. In comparison, when 
it came to federal policing initiatives, 
seventy-four per cent felt they could do 
a lot to countermand or revoke them. 
These disparities make sense. While 
many American public policies have 
been devolved to the state and local 
levels, immigration firmly remains in 
federal hands. 
State laws may further limit the policy 
autonomy of cities in this arena. Multiple 
states are considering legislation 
prohibiting sanctuary cities,* though 
some, notably, are pursuing policies that 
explicitly permit sanctuary jurisdictions. 
In Texas – a state that has been 
demographically transformed in recent 
decades by immigration – the governor 
signed a state law banning sanctuary 
cities; the law made police officials and 
local leaders subject to misdemeanour 
charges if they failed to honour requests 
from immigration agents to hold 
non-citizen inmates who are subject 
to deportation. 
Moreover, even in those American 
cities where the state governments are 
more permissive, cities face important 
constraints. They are often cash-
strapped, and limited from raising 
additional resources by onerous tax and 
expenditure limits imposed by their 
state governments.
That said, there remain many local 
policies at the disposal of mayors that 
could appreciably affect conditions on 
the ground for immigrants – perhaps 
most notably in the realm of policing. 
The other side
of the coinKatherine Levine Einstein 
A recent survey – covering 
over a hundred mayors in the 
United States – illustrates that 
a lot depends on whether these 
officials are willing to demand 
equal rights for their newest 
entrants, and to affect change 
in the face of a more stringent 
federal immigration policy.
In June 2018, a bipartisan delegation 
of mayors – including the president 
of the United States Conference of 
Mayors, Steve Benjamin – travelled to 
Tornillo, Texas, to protest the family 
separation policy of President Trump’s 
administration. America’s mayors have 
also stretched across party lines, in April 
2017, to call for immigration reform 
and to protest the proposed expansion 
of public charge rules in October 
2018, which penalized “lower-income 
immigrant families by denying them 
visas and green cards because they 
have received vital non-cash benefits 
to which they are legally entitled.” This 
bipartisan action contrasts sharply with 
the rancorous partisan polarization that 
defines the current national political 
conversations surrounding immigration. 
Yet, in spite of this mayoral public 
activism, there are many obstacles 
to locally-driven immigration reform. 
Indeed, these public actions belie stark 
internal divisions among American 
mayors. In the 2017 and 2018 Menino 
Survey of Mayors, our team at Boston 
University’s Initiative on Cities asked 
over a hundred mayors of cities – with 
populations of over 75,000 – their views 
on immigration, race, and racism, among 
other issues. In contrast with the partisan 
unity adopted by the US Conference of 
Mayors, mayors appear to be sharply 
divided on these issues. Eighty-six per 
cent of Democratic mayors believe 
that immigrants should receive local 
government services, regardless of their 
legal status, in contrast to a mere twenty-
nine per cent of Republicans.
Local governments can opt, in many 
states, not to enforce some aspects of 
national immigration law – becoming 
sanctuary cities. As the US Conference 
of Mayors noted in a statement issued 
on 25 January 2017: “Local police 
departments work hard to build and 
preserve trust with all of the communities 
they serve, including immigrant 
communities. Immigrants residing in our 
cities must be able to trust the police and 
all of city government.” 
Cities can also make government itself 
more welcoming. They can create offices 
of immigrant inclusion; provide city 
services in multiple languages; conduct 
outreach in immigrant communities; hire 
staff from diverse backgrounds. 
Starkly separated 
communities
Mayors and cities might also promulgate 
policies promoting equal access to 
quality local government services 
across immigrant and non-immigrant 
communities. America’s cities are highly 
segregated, with white people and 
people of colour – those of African 
descent, Asians and Hispanics – starkly 
separated into different neighbourhoods. 
In Boston, for example, sixty per cent of 
Hispanics would need to move from their 
current neighbourhood of residence 
in order to be evenly spread across the 
metropolitan area. 
This racial and ethnic segregation leads 
to concentrated poverty – in which socio-
economic deprivation is clustered in one 
place. Concentrated poverty is associated 
with a whole host of negative social and 
economic outcomes, including fewer job 
opportunities and higher crime. These 
areas, on average, have lower-quality 
government services. 
This neglect of disadvantaged 
communities has a myriad of causes. 
Residents in these communities are 
less likely to make demands of their 
government. They are less apt to have 
time to contact their government 
or trust that their government 
will take action if asked. 
* Sanctuary cities are those that are committed to 
protecting the rights of all its citizens, including 
undocumented immigrants, and providing basic 
services to them. In the US, these cities also ensure that 
undocumented immigrants who are not otherwise 
engaged in criminal activity are prevented from being 
detained or deported by the federal authorities.

Moreover, politicians are, on average, 
more responsive to affluent constituents; 
so, even when asked to take action by 
these communities, they are less likely to 
do so. The effect of historic disinvestment 
in these communities is cumulative, and 
challenging to overcome. 
What’s more, many mayors are reluctant 
to acknowledge local discrimination 
and inequities in public services. 
Only nineteen per cent of mayors 
believed that immigrants faced a lot of 
discrimination in their cities. Over eighty 
per cent of mayors of both political 
parties viewed the quality of their mass 
transit, street maintenance, and parks 
as equal for white people and people of 
colour. Acknowledging inequality and 
discrimination are key prerequisites to 
taking concrete policy actions that tackle 
these issues.
This is not to say that all mayors eschew 
acknowledging and addressing racial 
inequality. Here, again – as with views 
on immigrants receiving public services 
– the partisan divide was substantial. 
Democratic mayors were twenty 
percentage points more likely than 
Republicans to perceive discrimination 
against immigrants in their cities. 
Depending upon the policy area, 
Democrats were between twenty and 
fifty percentage points more apt than 
Republicans to believe that access to 
social and public goods like jobs, health 
care, and fair treatment by the courts was 
better for white people than for people 
of colour. While mayors across party 
lines have taken symbolic action against 
Trump’s immigration policies, Democratic 
mayors are substantially more likely to 
provide vocal support for undocumented 
immigrants, acknowledge local 
discrimination against immigrants, and 
admit that access to key public, social, 
and economic goods are racially unequal. 
Immigrants thus face an uneven 
patchwork of services to navigate, 
as some (largely Democratic) local 
governments aggressively promulgate 
initiatives to welcome immigrants and 
redress disparities, and others – due to 
limitations or local prejudices against 
newcomers – choose not to. 
Assistant professor of political 
science at Boston University, 
Katherine Levine Einstein received her 
Ph.D. in Government and Social Policy 
from Harvard University. Her work on 
local politics and policy, racial and ethnic 
politics, and American public policy has 
appeared in multiple academic journals.  
Giant picnic organized at the 
United States-Mexico border in 2017, 
by French artist JR.
© JR-ART-NET
