Dull noises are then heard in the next 
classroom. A few staff members – all 
connected by walkie-talkie – head to the 
classroom, ready to intervene. Inside, the 
teachers have already managed to calm 
the young boy who was hitting a wall. 
He lies on a small mattress in a space 
away from the others and two of the 
interveners stay with him to soothe him.
Tossed from 
one school to another
These outbursts are not uncommon, 
especially at the end of the year. 
“Many of these youth suffer from 
attachment disorders,” says the principal, 
Ysabelle Chouinard, who has taught 
Lyne Fréchet, Canadian journalist
To succeed where traditional schools have failed. This is the challenge 
that teachers at the Centre d’intégration scolaire (Centre for academic 
integration, CIS) in Montreal, Canada, face every day. The French-
language school takes in students whose educational paths have 
been rocky – gaining their trust is a prerequisite for any learning.
A second-chance
school in Montreal
at the school for seventeen years. 
“When the holidays arrive, the students 
are anxious. They don’t know what to 
expect and are afraid of parting from 
their teacher.” 
There is an immense need for affection 
in some of these young people, who 
have been tossed from one school to 
another and from one family to another.
With its brick walls, drawings hanging on 
the walls and worn-out lockers, CIS looks 
like any other school. Classrooms open 
onto rows of desks, aligned and facing a 
blackboard. From eight in the morning, 
students noisily invade the wide staircase 
that leads to the top floors. But the 
comparison ends there. 
This is because the school, located in 
the city’s Rosemont district, has been 
welcoming vulnerable students – 
students with learning disabilities or 
psychological problems – for nearly 
fifty years. Many of them have chaotic 
backgrounds and complicated family 
histories, and some have even been in 
conflict with the law. Aged from 6 to 18, 
many students have also had a difficult 
past in schools they have attended. 
They have experienced academic failure, 
successive expulsions or been relegated 
to the back of the classroom in special 
programmes for difficult students. CIS 
is a new beginning for them – on a 
completely different basis. 
At the end of June, a week before the 
summer holidays, the atmosphere is 
charged. The grade six students are 
preparing to take their “social universe” 
exam, a subject taught at the elementary 
and secondary levels, which covers the 
social and political history of Quebec. 
The children fidget in their seats. 
Their young teacher, Kénia Alvarado-Lara, 
announces that the questions will focus 
on the Roaring Twenties [the decade 
of the 1920s in Western culture] and 
the baby boom [a period marked by 
a significant increase in the birth rate, 
coined after the one that occurred in the 
United States and other parts of the world 
following the Second World War]. 
An educator at the Centre d’intégration 
scolaire for twenty-eight years, 
Luc Fugère gives instructions to Flora. 
Listening and empathy are key to 
building trust with the students.

The teachers have to deal with sudden 
changes in behaviour, emotional distress 
and violence, which sometimes requires 
police intervention. If the school is a little 
too big for the eighty-four students it 
takes in, it is because the unpredictable 
behaviour, yelling and fighting do not 
allow the school to share the premises 
with other students. 
Working at CIS requires a solid 
constitution. In addition to the principal, 
social workers, a dozen teachers and 
specialized educators are responsible 
for this unique school in Quebec. Many 
teachers or trainees who come with the 
idea of helping young people resolve 
their problems leave after a few months, 
bewildered. 
Alvarado-Lara admits that she has 
painful memories of her first year in the 
school. “My class consisted of sixteen 
students from Secondary I [grade seven 
in Quebec], who were very difficult 
cases. In a traditional school, it’s already 
a difficult age. But with them, I also had 
to face insults, physical violence and 
fights. I cried a lot and felt personally 
targeted by the insults. I couldn’t sleep.”
Honesty. Trust. Respect. Empathy. 
These words are often repeated by the 
teachers and educators at CIS. Without 
these patiently constructed relationships 
with students, nothing is possible. 
“You cannot approach a student with 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) in 
the same way as you would a student 
with an attachment disorder. But in 
any case, you have to be reassuring. 
If a student insults me, I have to get 
beyond that. There are days when a 
child is incapable of verbalizing what 
he feels. I need to spend some time 
with him. A young person who spits 
or bites is a child who is trying to tell 
me something,” explains Luc Fugère, a 
specialized educator. He has worked at 
the school for twenty-eight years and 
his role is to help young people manage 
their emotions. 
The teachers at CIS have all completed 
four years of university training in 
special education – a speciality that 
equips them to teach children with 
special needs. 
Taking a break with educator 
Mélanie Bélanger. In each classroom, 
a specialist is present to help the teacher 
manage the students’ emotions.
Over time, Alvarado-Lara has found 
ways to respond to these demanding 
students. “The relationships I’ve 
managed to develop with these young 
people, have allowed me to overcome 
all the challenges,” she continues. “We 
have developed a mutual respect over 
time. The other crucial factor was that 
my director trusted me. When I couldn’t 
take it anymore, she’d encourage me to 
take a day off. It’s important to take care 
of yourself.” 
Roxanne Gagnon-Houle, who has been 
teaching at CIS for ten years, has also 
learned to deal with strong emotions. 
She loves her work and the students 
love her. She only doubted this once 
– the day her ribs were broken in a 
fight. “At the secondary school level, 
I had students who had experienced 
homelessness, drug addiction and 
psychiatric disorders. The only way to 
intervene is to build a relationship of 
trust. You have to be honest and make a 
sincere commitment to them,” she says.

Social worker Pascale Montcalm (left) 
and teacher Emma Chouinard-Cintrao 
work to calm a student down, 
using great sensitivity.
Rekindling 
the desire to learn
Teachers have been trained to identify 
certain disorders, to respect the learning 
rhythm of a dyslexic child and to 
manage a classroom. But not everything 
can be learned at university. To restore 
the desire to learn in these youth who 
have a troubled relationship with school, 
it is also necessary to demonstrate 
initiative and creativity. 
“When I arrived,” says Alvarado-Lara, “I had 
only a blackboard, chalk and books. What 
could I do with these? I was convinced 
I couldn’t work here as I would in an 
ordinary school.” She then borrowed a 
projector from her brother and asked 
the principal for a laptop. She prepared 
interactive lessons, adding videos and 
photos, and succeeded in capturing the 
attention of her students. “I no longer had 
to do any class management. I integrated 
this method for each subject and gave 
the students pencils to take notes. It 
worked!” she enthuses.
Emma Chouinard-Cintrao, a third-year 
teacher, is completing her university 
degree in special education. She has been 
teaching at CIS for only a few months. 
To encourage learning, she takes every 
opportunity to think outside the box – by 
using educational games. To stimulate a 
taste for mathematics, she organizes cake 
and lemonade sales outside the school to 
familiarize students with fractions. 
Pet therapy, developed with the help 
of specialists, is also part of the school’s 
therapeutic arsenal. Several animals 
have been included in classrooms – 
guinea pigs for the youngest children, 
a trio of rats in the first year of primary 
school, and ferrets and rabbits in the first 
year of secondary school. Pet therapy 
days are also held with specialists, to 
help some students to communicate. 
Some shy children learn to become 
more assertive when a dog obeys their 
commands, for instance. 
These efforts are paying off. Andrew, 
15, who was dismissed at the end of 
elementary school, attended several 
anger management sessions until he 
felt better. “I’m impulsive and when I get 
angry, I hit out. Here, I was helped to find 
ways to change,” he says. 
His testimony is echoed by Joé, 12. 
“I have a behavioural problem. In my old 
school, I used to fight all the time. Here, 
there are people to supervise us when 
there are fights.”
This painstaking work with students 
to allow them to express themselves 
and to channel their aggressiveness, 
makes learning possible. “At first, I felt 
I was teaching for nothing,” explains 
Alvarado-Lara. “I thought they had 
too many behavioural problems to 
progress academically. But in fact, 
they’ve advanced very far in developing 
their skills. There are so many ways to 
teach differently.” 
“The younger the students are when they 
arrive, the more successful they will be 
in returning to mainstream school,” says 
Chouinard. The principal cites cases of 
students who have flourished after leaving 
CIS – such as Stéphanie, who earned a 
master’s degree in communication, or 
another student who went on to join 
a professional basketball team in the 
United States. “We don’t necessarily aim 
for university studies for all,” she stresses. 
“The important thing is for students to find 
fulfilment. Leading them towards their 
adult lives already means a lot.”
The only way 
to intervene is to build 
a relationship of trust. 
You have to be honest 
and make a sincere 
commitment to them 
