Setting off from Zhenping county and 
heading along the mountain road to the 
peak that rises 1,600 metres above sea 
level, you can see the Heihumiao primary 
school, nestled in the valley below. This is 
where Zhang Yugun has been teaching 
for the past eighteen years.
The village of Heihumiao is far away from 
everything. In earlier times, inhabitants 
who wanted to leave the mountain 
had to follow the trails carved by cattle 
and sheep on the ridge, climb over 
the hilltop, and then pass through the 
precipitous hillside of Bali. The mountain 
road is so rugged, it is impossible to ride 
a bicycle through it – it would take at 
least five hours to climb the hill, with 
no transportation available. The harsh 
conditions meant that few teachers were 
keen to take up positions here.
Wang Shuo, Chinese journalist 
The people who live in 
Heihumiao, in central China’s 
Henan province, often dream 
about leaving the mountains 
to find a better life in the city. 
Zhang Yugun also left. But 
once he graduated, he chose to 
return to the village where he 
grew up – to give the children a 
fighting chance. 
A teacher
brings hope 
to a remote Chinese village
“If teachers from outside won’t come 
here, and the students we train won’t 
stay, who would be responsible for the 
education of the children here?” asks 
Zhang. This question haunted him after 
he visited his old school, accompanied 
by the former principal, Wu Longqi. 
Even though he hesitated, due to the 
low wages and the tough environment, 
he finally decided to stay. He promised 
Wu that he would transform the lives of 
the children, and he has kept his word. 
In the absence of parents, most of whom 
work far from home, it is the teacher 
who accompanies the students each 
morning, up the steep path to school.

Due to the lack of teachers at the school 
in his isolated village, Zhang Yugun 
has learned to take on many roles. 
In addition to mathematics and morals, 
he also teaches music.Carrying hope 
on a shoulder pole
Books, textbooks, pencils and erasers – 
the school needed teaching materials, 
but also basic food supplies, such as oil, 
salt, vinegar, vegetables, rice. All these 
things had to be carried in from the city. 
From 2001 to 2006, Zhang carried these 
supplies all the way up the mountain, 
using baskets tied to a shoulder pole 
he inherited from Wu. This was the only 
way to make it possible for the children 
to attend school, and to give them the 
opportunity to leave the mountain 
one day – if they chose to.
One winter day, the mountain road was 
too slippery to walk on. It was almost 
the first day of school, and the children’s 
textbooks were still in Gaoqiu, a town 
more than thirty kilometres away. 
Faced with this challenge, Zhang and 
another teacher rushed to the town in 
the early morning, carrying the shoulder 
pole through muddy roads. When they 
returned to the school, weighed down 
with their load of textbooks, they were 
almost completely covered in mud. But 
the books remained clean.
Conditions have improved in recent 
years. Since 2006, a concrete road 
provides access to the village, breaking 
its isolation. Buses have started plying 
the route occasionally, since the 
winter of 2017. Zhang now drives a 
motorcycle to ferry textbooks and daily 
necessities to the village – he is often 
weighed down by over a hundred kilos. 
But conditions still remain difficult. 
Since the teacher’s return, four of his 
motorcycles have broken down, and he 
has had to replace countless tires.
Zhang refuses to complain, however. 
“I think all my efforts have been 
worthwhile, because the students 
I taught were able to go out of the 
mountains,” he says. Before he became 
a teacher in the village, he was the 
only student from Heihumiao to have 
attended college – the number has since 
increased to twenty-two. 
A versatile teacher
Due to the lack of teachers, Zhang has 
trained himself to take on many roles. 
He is both the principal and a teacher 
of mathematics and ethical education. 
Over the last eighteen years, he has also 
acquired skills that go well beyond the 
scope of his initial training. In addition 
to teaching, he doubles up as a cook, a 
tailor after school, and even a nurse, in 
emergencies. 
But his role of helping students goes 
even further. Most of the parents of the 
children work away from home, and 
Zhang understands the ordeals faced 
by each of the families. 

“During all these years, none of the 
students in our village have dropped out 
of school because of poverty, especially 
the girls,” the head of the village said. 
Zhang persuaded the parents of 
students whose families live far away 
from the school, to let their children live 
and eat on the school premises. Assisted 
by his wife, he has helped the students 
wash and mend their clothes, and has 
taken care of all their daily needs. With 
his meagre income, he has financed 
more than 300 students so they could 
continue their studies.” 
Fortunately, with the help of the 
education department, conditions at the 
school have continued to improve. With 
fifty-one students currently enrolled, 
the school now has new dormitory 
buildings, canteens, playgrounds, and 
computer classrooms.
Influenced and inspired by Zhang, four 
retired teachers have decided to return 
to the mountains to resume teaching. 
Encouraged by social recruitment, there 
are eleven teachers at the school today. 
“As long as children are there, so will we 
be,” some of them said. 
