We can see to what extent such assumptions 
have led to the shameless exploitation of 
nature in all its forms: agriculture, fishing, 
intensive livestock farming, mineral 
depletion, pollution of all kinds.
Ecological science is another approach, 
which conveys a completely different 
vision of the world. In 1937, the British 
botanist, Arthur George Tansley, proposed 
the concept of the ecosystem that would 
revolutionize the scientific relationship 
with nature. This concept refers to all the 
interactions of the various living species 
among themselves, and of all living 
organisms with the physical environment: 
soil, air, climate, etc. In this context, man 
rediscovers himself as belonging to nature, 
as an element of the ecosystem. Moreover, 
this ecosystem is a finite environment, 
with limited resources, both upstream and 
downstream of human activities.  
But many thinkers consider that the 
ecological science approach is insufficient. 
Deep ecologists, for example, believe that 
the core of the problem in the scientific 
approach, including the ecological one, 
is anthropocentrism. They advocate a 
philosophy of the totality that integrates 
humans with living organisms as a whole, 
without granting them any particular status. 
Respect for animals is the same as respect 
for humans. 
Bernard Feltz
Humanity is in a state of debit. Year after year, it consumes more 
resources than nature can provide. This over-consumption has a direct 
effect on the climate. To better understand the issues at stake, the Belgian 
philosopher and biologist Bernard Feltz sheds light on the complex 
relationships between humans and nature and then focuses on the 
ethical aspects of climate change management. 
The philosophical
and ethical 
issues of climate change 
A final understanding of human-nature 
relations attempts to keep a fair distance 
from the radicality of deep ecologists, while 
emphasizing the relevance of the criticism 
of ecological science. Nature and humans 
coexist and interpenetrate in a more 
respecting way of living. An animal can be 
respected for itself, without being given the 
same status as a human being.
A living species or a particular ecosystem are 
to be respected as remarkable achievements 
of nature, just as a work of art is a 
remarkable accomplishment of humanity. 
The aesthetic dimension of a work of art 
reflects a fundamental dimension of reality 
that only the artist is able to reveal. But 
such a relationship does not imply that the 
respected work has the status of a human. 
A hierarchy of values is possible. Animals, 
certain ecosystems and landscapes become 
respectable in two ways – it is the human 
being who decides to respect them, and it is 
a way of respect that does not equate with 
the respect due to humans. 
A major challenge for our time, climate 
change concerns both our daily lives and 
the world geopolitical order. It is one of 
the dimensions of a global ecological 
crisis, a direct consequence of the complex 
interactions between humans and nature. 
These relationships can be divided into four 
main approaches.
The first, that of Descartes, considers nature 
to be a set of objects made available to 
human beings. The seventeenth-century 
philosopher – a contemporary of Galileo and 
considered a great  initiator of modernity 
– advocated establishing life sciences that 
were similar to the emerging physical 
sciences. He defends the idea of an “animal 
machine”. Living things are nothing more 
than inert matter organized in a complex 
way. Only the human being has a substantial 
soul distinct from the body, making it the 
only respectable species. The rest of nature, 
living or inert, is part of the world of objects 
at humanity’s disposal. Descartes has no 
regard for the environment, which he views 
in a utilitarian way, and considers an infinite 
resource that humans can draw upon 
without any qualms.

At the crossroads of 
science and politics 
A dimension of the ecological crisis, climate 
change paves the way for a more specific 
reflection on the relationship between 
science and politics. 
Science bears a heavy responsibility for 
the emergence of the climate problem. It 
is largely because of the impressive power 
developed by new technologies and their 
unlimited use by economic powers that we 
have entered the Anthropocene. For the 
first time in history, human activities are 
leading to changes in certain environmental 
characteristics that affect all of humanity.
But science also makes us aware of the 
problems related to the ecological crisis. 
It plays a decisive role in the development 
of scenarios that could lead to the rational 
management of the climate crisis. Science 
can destroy us, but it can also save us. 
Integrated into a broader understanding 
of reality, the scientific approach remains 
decisive in controlling climate change. 
However, democracy is not technocracy. In 
a democracy, it is the politician who makes 
the  decisions. The German sociologist Max 
Weber (1864-1920) distinguished between 
the factual realm and the realm of values. On 
the knowledge side, scientists are specialists 
in facts. They are responsible for analysing 
situations and proposing various scenarios 
that are compatible with ecological 
constraints. 
We know the “imperative of human 
responsibility” principle that the German 
philosopher Hans Jonas developed in the 
late 1970s, thinking precisely of ecological 
issues: “Act so that the effects of your actions 
are compatible with the permanence of 
genuine human life on Earth.” 
From now on, it is a question of conceiving 
contemporary social life by integrating into 
it the concern for the sustainability of the 
system in the very long term, by including 
future generations in the scope of our 
responsibilities.
These environmental concerns must be 
consistent with contemporary ethical 
requirements, namely respect for human 
rights and equal consideration for all human 
beings. Not all human populations are 
equal in the face of the climate challenge. 
Paradoxically, the poorest countries are 
often those most affected by uncontrolled 
global warming. Respect for human 
rights must therefore lead to a principle 
of international solidarity that alone can 
guarantee both the global management of 
climate change and that specific measures 
for particularly complex situations will 
be taken. 
A living species or a 
particular ecosystem 
are to be respected 
as remarkable 
achievements 
of nature, just 
as a work of art 
is a remarkable 
accomplishment 
of humanity 
Politicians, on the other hand, act according 
to the values they are committed to 
upholding. In a democratic system, they 
derive their legitimacy from their election. 
They are elected to choose precisely the 
scenario that fits their value system. Climate 
change involves highly complex technical 
analyses, which are not always in line with 
policy directions. 
Environmental ethics  
Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged 
that we have begun a transition towards 
a society shaped decisively by ecological 
constraints. The involvement of everyone 
in their daily lives, the work of the various 
economic actors in their respective activities 
– from small and medium-sized enterprises 
to the most powerful multinational trusts 
and the involvement of state structures 
and  intermediary structures, trade unions, 
business federations, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), etc. – are essential 
conditions for effective action. 
Because the fundamental issue is the future 
of humanity. What pushes us to act is this 
realization that uncontrolled climate change 
can cause human life on Earth to become 
much more difficult, if not impossible. 

Minimum Monument, an ephemeral 
public art project by Brazilian artist Néle 
Azevedo. Hundreds of tiny human ice 
figures thaw in high temperatures the 
moment they are installed.  São Paulo, 
Brazil, 2016.

The principle of responsibility for future 
generations and the principle of solidarity of 
all towards all, are essential for an equitable 
management of the ecological crisis.
A Belgian biologist and philosopher, 
Bernard Feltz is Professor Emeritus at 
the Catholic University of Louvain. His 
research focuses on the philosophy 
of ecology, bioethical issues and 
science-society relations. He is currently 
Belgium’s representative on UNESCO’s 
Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee 
(IGBC).
A dimension of the ecological crisis, 
climate change paves the way for 
a more specific reflection on the 
relationship between science and 
politics
