Editorial
Sandrine teaches at a school in Burkina 
Faso, which has no water or electricity. A 
still from the shooting of the documentary, 
Teach Me If You Can, produced by 
French film production company, Winds, 
in partnership with UNESCO.

An “impossible profession”. For Sigmund 
Freud, education, like government 
and psychoanalysis, represented 
an undertaking “in which one can 
be sure beforehand of achieving 
unsatisfying results1”. It is no easy task 
to simultaneously transmit knowledge, 
maintain classroom discipline, stimulate 
curiosity, impart the rules of living 
together and train future citizens. 
The challenge is all the more difficult 
to take on in contexts that are marked 
– too often – by a lack of resources, 
overcrowded classrooms, or even the risk 
that the teacher’s original purpose loses 
its meaning. 
Certainly, everyone recognizes the key 
role teachers play. On a personal level, 
we can all name at least one teacher 
who made a difference – sometimes 
to such an extent that it redirected our 
whole lives. At the international level, the 
United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), Goal 4 in particular, 
recognize the importance of teachers in 
the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Agenda by 2030. 
Yet, the profession is being undermined. 
The development of cognitive 
neuroscience and the many applications 
of new technologies in the field of 
education are forcing the profession to 
adapt and reinvent itself. 
Once respected and valued, the role 
of the teacher is now contested, with 
teachers being held accountable for the 
failures of the education system.
1. Freud, S., 1937. Analysis Terminable and 
Interminable. 
2. Ingersoll, R., Merrill, E., Stuckey, D. and Collins 
G., 2014, updated October 2018. Seven Trends: The 
Transformation of the Teaching Force. Consortium for 
Policy Research in Education (CPRE) Research Reports. 
This negative perception of them can 
– in some cases – result in intimidation, 
or even violence, by students or 
their families. 
In fact, the profession is struggling to 
attract new recruits. After a few years of 
practice, many teachers are throwing 
in the towel. A 2014 study conducted 
in the United States on a sample of 
50,000 teachers2 shows that more than 
forty-one per cent of them (primary and 
secondary education levels combined) 
leave the profession within five years of 
entering it. 
Low wages, limited career advancement, 
strong societal pressures and a lack of 
resources are all factors that discourage 
young people from pursuing this career. 
Yet, over 69 million teachers will have to 
be recruited by 2030 to achieve the SDGs. 
Of these, 48.6 million new recruits will 
be needed to replace teachers leaving 
the profession. There is already an acute 
shortage of teachers in South and West 
Asia and in sub-Saharan Africa. 
In this context, how can we attract a 
new generation of motivated teachers? 
This question inspired the theme of the 
2019 edition of World Teachers’ Day, 
5 October: Young Teachers: The Future of 
the Profession. 
But beyond the alarming numbers, 
statistics and headlines, there are still 
teachers who are not discouraged by the 
difficult situation. Teachers who continue 
teaching in the most impoverished 
settings, in overcrowded classrooms. 
Teachers who choose to focus on learners 
with troubled backgrounds, those who 
are out of the school system or in remote 
areas. Teachers for whom teaching 
is a commitment, a daily struggle. 
It is these teachers that the Courier is 
honouring today.
Vincent Defourny and Agnès Bardon
This Wide Angle section is 
published to mark the occasion of 
World Teachers’ Day, celebrated on 
5 October every year. 
