Carolina Jerez Henríquez, 
UNESCO Office in Santiago, Chile
Situated on a hill in the seaport 
city of Valparaiso, on the Chilean 
coast, the Juan Luis Vives school 
was founded in 1999. Today it 
has 550 students. What makes it 
unique is that it is located inside 
the city’s prison. Every day, 
the teachers who work there 
are forced to cope with the 
challenges of the prison world 
– which include disparities in 
learning abilities, and emotions 
on edge. The school was 
awarded the UNESCO Confucius 
Prize for Literacy in 2015.
Teaching
behind bars
in Valparaiso 
Sonia Álvarez is a history and civic 
education teacher. She has been 
campaigning for the right to education 
of people in detention for the last forty 
years. “Earlier, I felt that something was 
missing in my life. Now, I know that what 
I do is essential,” she says, as she climbs 
the stairs leading to the second floor 
of the school. It is a completely new 
space that she designed herself and had 
built inside the prison, using public and 
private funds. 
Working under the constraints that 
are typical of prison life, the school 
provides basic and secondary education 
and vocational training in cookery and 
catering to enable prisoners to learn 
a trade and increase their chances of 
finding work once they return to the 
outside world. 
Giving lives a meaning
According to figures from the Chilean 
government’s National Coordination 
for Youth and Adult Education, there 
were seventy-two educational centres 
in Chile’s prisons in 2018. The Juan Luis 
Vives school is part of this network. 
Álvarez and her colleagues believe 
that education is a liberating process 
that renews the social condition of the 
individual – as the Brazilian educator 
Paolo Freire would say – both in prison 
and outside. That helps them reflect on 
and give meaning to the process. 
Teaching in this context is a daily 
challenge. “It has a lot to do with teacher 
motivation and having a concept of 
quality education that is relevant to the 
student body,” explains Jassmin Dapik, 
another teacher. “Here, it is vital that 
the teacher has the creativity necessary 
for what she or he teaches to be useful. 
As teachers, we need to teach them so 
they are able to continue their studies 
outside. And above all, so they can 
function as citizens and make the right 
decisions,” she adds. 
But the role of the teachers here is 
not limited to the transmission of 
knowledge. They also help prisoners to 
regain some of their self-esteem. “One 
of the most important things is that the 
teachers don’t treat us like prisoners,” 
says José, who is serving a sentence 
at Valparaiso prison and attends 
classes regularly.
“For them, we are people who have 
dignity and rights – they want us to be 
better people than when we enter here, 
and for that, they must have empathy,” 
points out Carlos, another inmate. “And 
it is because of this characteristic that 
when we are with the teachers in class, 
we do not feel like we are in jail, but like 
free people,” he adds.
The classes, held outside of prison time, 
are privileged moments where stories 
that are difficult to articulate, can be 
shared. “Behind each person here, 
there are terrible catastrophes – I call 
them survivors,” says Leopoldo Bravo, 
another teacher. “As a teacher, one must 
assimilate that information and build 
the dynamics to face this reality. The 
students here are diminished in every 
way. More than providing an academic 
education, we are dedicated to the 
rescue of the human being.” 
To this end, teachers are supported 
by Jessica León, a psychologist who 
encourages the students to be more 
receptive to the learning process. Her 
work to actively support teachers 
is aided by the School Integration 
Programme (PIE). “This is very necessary, 
because in this context, it takes a lot of 
effort from the teachers to somehow fill 
in the gaps that the inmates have – at 
the academic and emotional levels,“ 
she explains. “For us as a team, it is 
very important to maintain harmony 
in a context in which there are 
conflicting emotions.” 
Far from the historic quarter of 
Valparaiso, which features on UNESCO’s 
World Heritage List, the Valparaiso 
Prison is located off the tourist track – in 
a windswept neighbourhood in one of 
the city’s most disadvantaged areas. 
This is where the Juan Luis Vives school 
welcomes prisoners, who attend to 
resume their often-disrupted schooling 
or to pursue vocational training courses. 
In all cases, the aim is to better prepare 
them for the life that awaits them 
outside, once their sentences have 
been served. 
At the school, each day brings its own 
surprises. “It is not possible to plan 
anything,” explains one teacher. “It 
all depends on what happens inside 
the prison, whether there are raids or 
searches being carried out, for example. 
There are days when a normal schedule 
is possible. And others when you can’t 
even teach.”

The students themselves recognize that 
teachers working within the prison walls 
face a daunting task. They say that they 
have serious problems concentrating, 
and regret not having the necessary time 
to advance in their studies as they would 
in a regular school. “We depend a lot on 
what the prison guards decide, we don’t 
have a regular schedule,” José explains. 
Surmounting 
difficulties
Another major challenge is the absence 
of educational programmes specifically 
designed for prisoners or adapted to 
their situation. In fact, it is the teachers 
themselves, without any specific 
training, who design strategies, plan 
activities and evaluate content – to 
ensure that their classes are relevant, 
and the learning useful. 
Also, classes in prison are usually a mix 
of students with different backgrounds 
and abilities – which makes planning 
a class an essential task, but also a 
daily challenge. “We have to take all 
this into account when planning our 
day. We must consider what we are 
going to teach, and what values we 
want to give them – because our class 
is based mostly on concepts, we want 
them to retain something,” Dapik says. 
To do this, teachers at the school use 
the curriculum of Chile’s Ministry of 
Education as a starting point – and then 
adapt it to the different levels and needs 
of their learners. 
Yet another challenge for teachers is 
getting students to attain a similar 
level, as many of them have had their 
schooling interrupted one or more 
times. There are also many instances of 
students not attending classes regularly, 
which makes it harder for them to keep 
up with their studies. But these repeated 
challenges are not likely to discourage 
the teachers. “We know that education 
transforms people,” concludes Bravo. 
“We see these changes taking place 
over time; it is this satisfaction that 
motivates us.” 
A poster designed by Mexican graphic artist 
Elmer Sosa, on the theme of the right to education.
The teachers help prisoners 
to regain some of 
their self-esteem
