Johan Hattingh
If rich countries can adapt to rising 
temperatures “with the flick of a 
thermostat”– to use the metaphor 
of the South African Nobel 
Peace Prize winner Desmond 
Tutu – developing countries face 
far more dramatic challenges. 
A reflection on a shared 
solidarity informed by an ethical 
consciousness. 
Facing the challenges of climate change, the 
world today is more in need of a framework 
of  ethics and an ethically informed practice 
of international solidarity than ever before. 
This need arises, in the first place, from the 
stark reality that the global challenges and 
mega-trends of our time – climate change, 
the movement of people, geopolitical 
tensions, security, and international 
terrorism – become more and more 
integrated, but our responses to them are 
more and more fragmented. This was the 
core message of António Guterres, United 
Nations Secretary-General, in his speech 
to the World Economic Forum at Davos, 
Switzerland, in January 2019. 
In the second place, and perhaps more 
importantly, the need for international 
solidarity also springs from the causes and 
effects of climate change itself. Climate 
change is the product of a world that is 
already deeply divided, and in its effects and 
impacts, intensifies and multiplies divisions 
and vulnerabilities that already exist.
A question of international
 solidarity
This also applies on a subnational level 
to marginalized social groups and 
communities. These are undeniable political 
and social facts, experienced by many as 
injustices. Poorer nations and groups, for 
example, are much more vulnerable to the 
risks and burdens of climate change, while 
they have contributed much less, if anything 
at all, to its causes. 
Similarly, poorer nations and groups already 
need to adapt to climate change, while 
they have the least resources to do so. 
Developing nations and groups are thus 
dependent on assistance for adaptation, 
while the urgency for such assistance is not 
very high in more affluent parts of the world. 
The rich are not directly affected by climate 
change for now, or if they are, they can 
adapt to it fairly easily.  
This asymmetry has been captured neatly 
by Desmond Tutu, former Archbishop of 
Cape Town, South Africa, when he pointed 
out in the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) Human Development 
Report 2007/2008 (p. 166) that those in 
more affluent parts of the world can – at 
least for now – adapt to rising temperatures 
by merely adjusting their air conditioning 
“with the flick of a thermostat”. But for 
countless women in developing nations, 
adaptation would entail walking ever-longer 
distances to fetch clean drinking water for 
their households.
The range of possibilities
The need for standing together and 
co-operating with one another in response 
to climate change is clearly there, but the 
world is divided, and the prospects for 
overcoming these divisions are very dim.
So, what, if anything, can we do about 
this? There are three obvious things we 
could do for a start: expand our conceptual 
understanding of the notion of solidarity; 
remove two of the stumbling blocks – 
human development and jobs – that are 
often used as excuses for not addressing 
climate change; and move the conversation 
about solidarity from political and social 
facts to that of ethical principles. 
Let us tackle the major themes in broad 
outline, noting how ethical considerations 
already start to emerge in the conversation 
about the concept of solidarity.
Expanding and 
deepening the notion 
of solidarity 
Popularly, solidarity has been understood 
in recent times as a call for unity in trade 
union or political circles in the fight against 
labour exploitation or oppression. In both 
contexts, solidarity as a concept is linked 
to compassion with, and lending support – 
materially or otherwise – to victims of unfair 
labour practices or political injustice.
All these connotations are also present 
when solidarity is evoked as a basis for 
the fight against climate change: unity, 
identification, compassion, support and 
assistance.  But in this context, its meaning 
is shifted to wider target audiences and 
contexts than that of labour movements or 
liberation struggles.
In the fight against climate change, victims 
are usually associated with those suffering 
directly – and often very dramatically and 
visibly – from extreme weather events (for 
example, floods, hurricanes, droughts, fires). 
In such cases, humanitarian aid is usually 
mobilized fairly quickly, within states or 
internationally, to provide for the immediate 
needs of victims. 
Our motivation for such acts of solidarity 
is usually referred to as human solidarity, 
based on a recognition of those that suffer 
as fellow human beings, sharing the same 
fate as we do – their fate is our fate, and we 
cannot ignore it. This is often captured by 
metaphors of society as an organism, or the 
whole of humanity as one family. 
The need for international 
solidarity also springs from the 
causes and effects of climate 
change itself

Climate change, however, confronts us 
with the interdependence of us humans 
on one another and on ecosystems for 
our survival and flourishing, embedded 
as these ecosystems are in the biosphere, 
earth and planetary systems – all unfolding 
in processes of natural evolution over time. 
Accordingly, notions of earth solidarity, 
planetary solidarity, and intergenerational 
solidarity can be envisaged to elaborate 
on the reality that all life on earth is part, 
as it were, of the same community – the 
community of life sharing the same fate 
together. 
Human development 
versus climate?
In the international community, the fight 
against climate change is often framed as 
a dilemma. States often say they cannot 
engage in this fight because they first 
have to make sure that their citizens have 
development opportunities to move out 
of poverty. The same excuse is often made 
about jobs: if the fight against climate 
change puts workers at a disadvantage, then 
they cannot join in.
The argument about jobs was precisely the 
excuse used by the United States to justify 
its withdrawal from the Paris Agreement 
(COP21). But are poverty alleviation and job 
retention really so diametrically opposed to 
taking action on climate change? This was 
exactly the conundrum addressed in the 
2007/2008 Human Development Report, 
with the telling title: Fighting climate change: 
Human solidarity in a divided world. 
In this comprehensive report, two core 
messages are communicated. First, that 
climate change will definitely have a 
negative effect on human development 
in the long run, making it more difficult 
to achieve the Sustainable Development 
Goals (called the Millennium Development 
Goals when the report was written), and 
eventually, even reversing many of the 
gains that have been made in human 
development thus far in history. This is an 
alarming message, putting a big question 
mark on the argument that responses to 
climate change can be put on the back 
burner while we first eradicate poverty in 
the world.
In response to the serious and highly urgent 
need for human development and poverty 
alleviation, the second core message 
of the 2007/2008 report is that human 
development and the fight against climate 
change are not two separate agendas. They 
are two dimensions of the same agenda 
that are inseparably linked and need to be 
pursued together. 
In policy and project terms, this means that 
measures adopted to respond to climate 
change should at the same time also 
contribute to human development, and 
have a beneficial impact in both areas. In 
ethical terms, solidarity in the fight against 
climate change conversely means that the 
poor and the vulnerable cannot be left 
behind. Their interests need to be addressed 
as well, and indeed as a matter of priority, 
in ways so smart and intelligent that the 
human development agenda and the 
climate change agenda fully merge.
Balancing Bamboo #3, Vanuatu, 
2015. With the island of Malekula in 
the background, a girl balances a long 
bamboo stick on her head. Will this become 
the new horizon one day? “Every year, 
the sea level is rising at an accelerating 
pace,” observes Dutch photographer 
Scarlett Hooft Graafland.
© Scarlett Hooft Graafland

The same argument applies to the retention 
of jobs. If workers are left behind in the 
fight against climate change, the ethical 
imperatives of solidarity are betrayed. 
Clearly, if jobs are lost in the fight against 
climate change, then we haven’t applied 
our minds as intelligently and smartly as we 
should have done.
An ethical debate
This is why we need to shift the debate on 
solidarity from the field of socio-political 
facts to that of ethical principles. In this 
regard, UNESCO’s Declaration of Ethical 
Principles in Relation to Climate Change 
(2017) is a good place to start. Solidarity 
features there as one of six ethical principles 
that should guide all decision-makers in 
their responses to climate change (see p. 9). 
In the context of social and political facts, 
the conversation is usually about a lack of 
solidarity, or the impossibility of achieving 
it – turning this into a convenient excuse to 
do nothing, rather than something, about 
climate change. In the ethical sphere, the 
conversation shifts to solidarity as a form 
of conscience and a source of inspiration 
for action – that is, as a commitment and 
point of departure, rather than a technical 
prerequisite for action.
Given the ethical demands of solidarity 
in the fight against climate change, huge 
uncertainties  remain in an increasingly 
divided world. A radically expanded notion 
of solidarity may not facilitate international 
cooperation. But it could be an invaluable 
source of inspiration and  motivation to 
undertake the mammoth task of tackling 
climate change together.
A professor of philosophy at South Africa’s 
Stellenbosch University, Johan Hattingh 
(South Africa) specializes in the areas of 
applied ethics, environmental ethics and 
climate change ethics. He served two 
terms as a member of UNESCO’s World 
Commission on the Ethics of Scientific 
Knowledge and Technology (COMEST). 
He was also President of the Ad Hoc Expert 
Group convened by UNESCO in 2016 to 
prepare the first draft of the Declaration 
of Ethical Principles in Relation to Climate 
Change.
Climate Frontlines
Many of those most vulnerable to the 
effects of climate change – like those 
living in the Arctic, on small islands 
or at high altitudes – are unsure what 
kind of future to expect. That is why 
UNESCO, in collaboration with various 
other organizations, launched Climate 
Frontlines.
The global forum allows these 
communities to connect with 
each other, and to share local and 
indigenous knowledge and findings 
from scientific research. It contributes 
to the strengthening of solidarity and 
helps communities to feel less isolated 
in the face of climate risk. 
www.climatefrontlines.org
Cut off from the world, these villagers 
watch helplessly as the dam breaks and 
waters rise in the upazila (sub-district) of 
Raomari, in Bangladesh. “It all happened 
in half an hour,” recalls Bangladeshi 
photographer Rasel Chowdhury.  
