A tree trunk in the wild, 
carved by the Maori.
© Matias Dandrea / Shutterstock.com



The umbilical
cord
The Tuawhenua explain
their attachment to the land
The notion of tătai whakapapa is 
fundamental to the world-view of the 
Tuawhenua. These Maori of New Zealand 
believe that everything that exists in 
their world is genealogically connected 
– bats, lizards, birds, insects, trees, 
plants, mountains, rivers and lakes. This 
connectedness provides strength to the 
ecosystem. As these elements are eroded, 
so is the resilience and integrity of the 
environment and the tribe.
The same tradition applies to the pito, or 
umbilical cord – the action of burying it 
on your lands signifies your permanent 
connectedness to Papatŗănuku, Mother 
Earth. It connects you to your place in 
the world.
Maintaining ties to the land and its 
resources is critical to the Tuawhenua, 
as this is perceived as an expression 
of their mana, authority or power. 
Regardless of hardships and downfalls 
and whatever was happening in the 
world, the Tuawhenua elders recognized 
the need to always uphold the mana 
of the individual, of the hapŗ or the 
sub-tribe, and of the iwi, the tribe. 
The elders understood it was hard for 
some to keep ties and bonds to the land, 
the waterways, the animals and the birds 
– but these were all seen to be part of 
what it means to be Tuawhenua. 
The elders recognized that mana was 
one of the most important principles for 
their people. But it was reinforced by the 
concept of mauri, the life force or essence 
of life. When the Tuawhenua refer to 
the purity in their culture, it reflects the 
mauri of the environment. For them, the 
mauri of the forest can never be taken 
away. As long as the rivers flow, as long 
as one tree stands, the life force cannot 
be extinguished – every element of the 
world has a certain level of mauri.
Kirituia Tumarae-Teka and James (Tahae) 
Doherty (members of New Zealand’s 
Tuawhenua community), with Phil Lyver 
(a researcher from New Zealand).
Source: Indigenous and Local Knowledge about 
Pollination, UNESCO, 2015.
For the Tuawhenua, it is the whenua, or 
the land, that defines who you are and 
where you come from. The word also 
means placenta. In both cases, whenua 
refers to your beginning and to your 
connection with your mother – the one 
who gave you life.
When Tuawhenua women give birth, 
wherever they are in the world, the 
placenta must be brought back home 
and be buried on the tribal lands. 
