In Ancient Greece, in the fifth century 
B.C., seeds of spices, corn and grains 
were planted in terracotta or basketwork 
containers. Called Gardens of Adonis, they 
were germinated to honour the mortal 
lover of the goddess of love, Aphrodite 
during the festival of Adonis, held in mid-
July every year.
In contrast, there is no mention of ritual 
sprouts in the Avesta, or in Persian 
writings on Nowruz. Nor are sprouts a 
part of the rituals observed by the Parsis, 
the followers of the Zoroastrian religion 
who fled from Persia in successive waves 
to India between the seventh and tenth 
centuries, following the Arab conquests 
of their country. 
Yet the custom of sprouted seeds 
endures, as the centrepiece of the haft 
sin table, around which some 300 million 
people across the world gather each 
spring to celebrate Nowruz.
The sprouts tradition might have spread 
from South India, where they are still 
used in ceremonies. According to the 
French ethnologist Louis Dumont, 
women belonging to the Piramalai 
Kallar community in Tamil Nadu, who 
want to fulfil their vows, balance pots 
on their heads – filled with various 
items, including sprouts obtained by 
“germinating seven or nine seeds in a 
container in the dark for a week.”
In the belief systems of all the world’s 
peoples, as time completes its annual 
cycle, there is a great risk that humankind 
will perish. They believe that performing 
rituals will allow them to go beyond 
this cycle. The New Year festivals, often 
celebrated to usher in spring, herald the 
rebirth of nature. 
Nowruz, which literally means “new day”, 
is one of these. Its origins, which date 
back at least two thousand years, are 
unclear, but the tradition is alive and well 
and celebrated in all the countries that 
were once part of the Persian Empire. 
In Iran, the centre of ancient Persia, 
preparations begin two or three weeks 
before Nowruz. Women begin to “shake” 
their houses – performing a massive 
spring cleaning. On the Tuesday before 
the festival, the men organize games 
which involve jumping over fires. 
Meanwhile, children put on masks 
and go from house to house in small 
groups, knocking on doors, hoping to 
receive cakes or coins. This tradition is 
reminiscent of Halloween, a holiday now 
associated with All Saints’ Day in the 
English-speaking and Celtic worlds; and 
Koliada, a Slavic winter solstice festival, 
which has, over the years, become part of 
Christmas celebrations. 
Going back to Iran: when the day of the 
vernal equinox dawns, the beginning 
of the festivities is announced by the 
sounds of the drum of Haji Firouz, a kind 
of king’s jester with a blackened face. 



Nowruz:
The seeds of a new day
Salvatore D’Onofrio
From the cult of the vegetation god Osiris in ancient Egypt to the 
summer solstice celebrations in Sardinia, Italy, to the Maronite feast 
of Eid el Burbara in Lebanon and the ceremonies of the Piramalai 
Kallar in Tamil Nadu, India, the symbol of the sprouted seed plays 
a central role in many rituals. Wheat, barley, or lentil sprouts are 
also at the heart of Nowruz – the New Year of the peoples who were 
once part of the Persian Empire – celebrated each spring by around 
300 million people worldwide. But why are the shoots thrown 
into the water? 
Every home – including Iranian 
households in the diaspora – sets up 
a table with haft sin, or seven items, all 
beginning with the letter ‘s’ (sin). They are 
the sabzeh (sprouts of wheat, oats, lentils 
and other seeds), sir (garlic), sib (apple), 
summak (sumac), senjed (the jujube fruit), 
serkeh (vinegar) and samanu (a wheat 
pudding made by slow-cooking ground 
wheat sprouts).
Sometimes a mirror (aine), cakes or coins 
are added. The Koran may also be placed 
on the table (having replaced the Avesta, 
the sacred book of the Zoroastrians), 
and even some poetry. For example, 
The Divan of Hafez, by the Persian mystic 
poet famous for memorizing the Koran, 
is often used for divination.
The family meal includes fish and rice, 
but the centrepiece of the table is always 
the sabzeh. The seeds have been sown 
by women, on plates inside the house 
at the beginning of the festivities, and 
constantly watered so the young green 
shoots are ready on Nowruz. 
Why these shoots? 
The origins of the sprout ritual are difficult 
to determine. The oldest references go 
back to the Germinating Beds of Osiris of 
Ptolemaic Egypt – a tradition in which soil 
was moulded into the shape of figurines, 
representing the god of the dead and 
resurrection to eternal life. The pottery 
bricks, made of earth kneaded with water 
and barley grains, were placed in tombs 
in a reclining position. 
Nauryz, Navruz, Nawrouz, Nevruz, Nooruz, 
Novruz, Nowrouz, Nowruz! So many 
ways of writing the same word for this 
new year and spring festival celebrated 
notably in Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, 
India, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan 
and Uzbekistan. In 2009, the festival was 
inscribed on UNESCO’s Representative 
List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage 
of Humanity, before this inscription was 
extended to new countries in 2016. 
Since 2010, 21 March is celebrated as 
the International Day of Nowruz. 

In the Judeo-Christian 
tradition 
In Europe too, the new shoots are central 
to various festivals. In Provence, France, 
on 4 December, Saint Barbara’s Day, it is 
the custom to germinate wheat grains 
from the previous harvest in three cups 
and to place them on the table of the 
“grand supper” on the twenty-fourth. 
They are then placed in the crib of 
the Nativity scene. The same tradition 
exists in Lebanon among the Maronite 
Christians of Arab ethnicity, and in 
Sicily, Italy, among the inhabitants of 
Castelbuono in Palermo.
On 19 March, Sicilians also decorate Saint 
Joseph’s Table with shoots, along with up to 
101 delicacies. This is to celebrate both the 
virtues of poverty, represented by the saint, 
and those of wealth, represented by the 
wheat – in particular by the bread, baked 
for the occasion using elaborate recipes. 
In southern Italy, on the Holy Thursday 
before Easter, shoots are placed on the altar 
in the oratory where, according to Catholic 
liturgy, the Eucharist is kept. Meanwhile, 
the Jewish community in Rome maintains 
a ritual custom of shoots that dates back 
to the Middle Ages, during the festivals of 
Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.
Our European tour ends on 21 June, the 
summer solstice, in the small town of 
Bari Sardo in Sardinia, Italy. Here we can 
witness a procession of women carrying 
nenniri, or shoots, on their heads in 
containers – topped by an impressive 
cane structure, decorated with delicately-
shaped breads and seasonal fruit. The 
women walk through the streets to the 
sea, into which they throw their nenniri.
The thirteenth day
In South India, too, the Kallar women 
form a procession, carrying shoots on 
their heads. They end their ceremonial 
journey by dancing around the shoots 
before flinging them into the water.
In Ancient Greece, the Gardens of Adonis 
were also consigned to the water, in 
fountains or the sea, after being carried 
over roof terraces – just as Mazdaean 
Iranians still do today in Yazd, and 
elsewhere in Iran.
In Iran, on the thirteenth day after Nowruz, 
everyone spends the day outdoors – eating, 
playing, singing and performing the final 
ritual: throwing the shoots into running 
water. But not before the girls have braided 
a few strands of the shoots, making a wish 
to find a husband in the coming year. 
Nowruz is one of those celebrations that 
bring together societies that are distant 
from each other, both in space and time 
– the periodic return of vegetation is seen 
as a symbol of a new beginning of life. 
But while their germination symbolizes a 
renewal, the seeds also carry within them, 
all the troubles of the year that is ending. 
This ambivalent nature of the shoots 
makes it necessary to get rid of them, 
letting the waters carry our ills far away 
from us. 
Italian anthropologist Salvatore 
D’Onofrio is a professor at the University 
of Palermo and a member of the 
Laboratory of Social Anthropology 
at the Collège de France, where he 
coordinates the Cahiers d’anthropologie 
sociale collection and is part of the “New 
Year Archives in Paris” working group. 
He is the author of Le matin des dieux. 
Du Norouz persan aux Pâques chrétiennes 
(The Morning of the Gods. From Persian 
Nowruz to Christian Easter, 2018). 
A Nowruz celebration at the foot of 
the Hisor Fortress, Tajikistan, in 2018.
