Congo:
A class of seventy-six
Laudes Martial Mbon, 
Congolese journalist 
Saturnin Serge Ngoma, a teacher 
at La Poudrière primary school 
in Brazzaville, Congo, gives 
geometry and grammar lessons 
to a seriously overcrowded 
class every day. Teaching in a 
school that lacks everything is 
a constant struggle. 
In the dusty courtyard of La Poudrière 
primary school, the cries of the children 
have been temporarily silenced since 
the beginning of June, with the start of 
the holidays. Only the roar of airplane 
engines at Brazzaville’s Maya-Maya 
Airport – whose runway is separated from 
the school by a simple paved road and 
a few houses – occasionally disrupts the 
tranquility of this hot summer afternoon. 
Just a few weeks ago, seventy-six 
students, twenty-seven boys and 
forty-nine girls, crowded every morning 
at 7 a.m. into the first-year elementary 
school class (CM1) – the penultimate level 
of the primary cycle – taught by Saturnin 
Serge Ngoma. “If I add the six children 
I have at home, I took care of eighty-two 
children this year. Exhausting!” smiles this 
almost six-foot-tall giant, sitting at the 
foot of a mango tree. 
The primary school – named after 
this neighbourhood where a powder 
magazine [gunpowder store] was located 
before independence – was Ngoma’s very 
first post after he was recruited by the 
state in 2017. “You could say that I was 
spoiled,” he says, pointing to the school 
premises – two makeshift shacks that 
house six classrooms, surrounded by tall 
grass and vegetable gardens. 
On rainy days, the clay courtyard turns 
into sticky mud. The school is not 
enclosed. During the year, teachers give 
their classes with the doors open, under 
the gaze of passers-by who cross the 
courtyard to walk from one part of the 
neighbourhood to another. 
The reign of making do
Everything is lacking in this school, which 
has no fences and no latrines. Before 
more tables were found at the start of 
the school year, Ngoma’s students were 
packed in, four to a desk. The others sat 
on the floor. Faced with such deprivation, 
making do was the order of the day. 
Teacher Saturnin Serge Ngoma in the 
makeshift barracks of La Poudrière 
school in Brazzaville.

“The students collected small planks 
here and there, on which they 
settled. It was really not an easy 
situation,” the teacher sighed. 
The children also have to share the few 
textbooks available at the school, getting 
together in groups of three or four to do 
exercises, or during reading time. The 
situation is all the more critical because 
many students are experiencing learning 
difficulties. Learning French is particularly 
hard for them. “I have to pay close 
attention during the reading exercises 
because some students don’t have a 
good grasp of the language and so they 
recite something other than the text – 
they make it up.”
Nor is it easy to enforce discipline among 
such a large number of pupils. Ngoma has 
his own special methods to avoid being 
overwhelmed. The first is to send his 
most restless students to the blackboard. 
“They’re afraid they won’t know how to 
do an exercise in front of the others, so 
they make sure they don’t get themselves 
into that situation. If they don’t behave, 
I also give them punishments – verbs to 
conjugate, and in the most extreme cases, 
I send them outside to clean the yard.”
In spite of these precarious conditions, 
sixty-two students from Ngoma’s class 
successfully moved up to the next 
grade at the end of the school year. He 
takes pride in the fact that one of his 
students topped the whole school, with a 
12.5 overall average. 
A graduate with a master’s degree in 
sustainable development economics, this 
40-year-old teacher came to teaching late 
– after working as a security guard and 
giving courses in private institutions. Yet, 
in spite of his demanding daily routine 
and a paltry salary, he has no intention of 
changing professions. 
In September, he will take the same road 
he walks every day for half an hour to 
get from his district of La Frontière to 
La Poudrière. “Mr Ngoma always tells 
us that he doesn’t know many people 
who have succeeded without going 
to school,” Guelor, one of his former 
students, sums up. 
A still from the shooting of the documentary, 
Teach Me If You Can. Taslima, a Bangladeshi 
teacher, works on board a floating school, 
the only way to continue to teach students 
in a country hit hard by rising waters.
