
disciplines did not exist at the time, the 
scientist perceived the need to prevent 
the excessive exploitation of natural 
resources – to inform people about the 
exhaustibility of minerals, and to call for the 
parsimonious consumption of oil, water 
and coal. Mendeleev stressed the need to 
focus on coal gasification and to change the 
methods of extracting and transporting oil. 
He advocated the respectful use of the soil 
in order to improve its fertility. He reflected 
on the modernization of Russia.
Natalia Tarasova and Dmitry Mustafin
1 March 1869 is the date of a 
discovery that changed the 
course of science in the world. 
On that day, Dmitry Mendeleev 
completed his work on the 
periodic table of elements, 
which would play a fundamental 
role in the future of chemistry 
– but also in physics, biology, 
astronomy and geochemistry. 
Even more interesting is that 
he revolutionized the ideas of 
what is now termed sustainable 
development.  
Mendeleev was fiercely critical of what 
we now call oligarchy and corruption. He 
believed that any possibility of a monopoly 
of natural resources should be eradicated. 
But these warnings were not heeded either 
at the time or in the twentieth century, 
when Russia privatized its oil and mining 
deposits. In the nineteenth century, the 
powerful oil and coal oligarchy fought an 
implacable and victorious battle against 
Mendeleev, to prove that he was not a great 
scientist. 
The United Nations proclaimed 2019 
as the International Year of the Periodic 
Table of  Chemical Elements. It marks the 
150th anniversary of the publication of 
the first model of the periodic table in 
the Review of the Russian Chemical Society 
by the illustrious Russian scientist Dmitry 
Mendeleev, considered one of the fathers 
of modern chemistry. At that time, when 
knowledge of the structure of the atom was 
largely imprecise, periodic law could only 
be formulated by a man endowed with an 
extraordinary predictive power, the intuition 
of a genius. 
Yet, in Mendeleev’s bibliography, less than 
one-tenth of his research is devoted to 
chemistry. The overwhelming majority of 
his work concerns other scientific fields, 
including aeronautics, meteorology, Arctic 
exploration, ice-breaker design, popular 
education, the denunciation of spiritualism, 
legal expertise and economics – to name a 
few of the issues in which this encyclopaedic 
mind was interested.
Much of his research was devoted to what 
we now term sustainable development, 
the rational management of natural 
resources and ecology. Although, obviously, 
these fields of knowledge and academic 
Dmitry Mendeleev: 
The teachings of a prophet


A portrait of Dmitry Mendeleev 
by Yuri Konev, a Russian painter from 
the second half of the twentieth century.

Even the members of the St. Petersburg 
Academy of Sciences eventually chose Fedor 
Beilstein (whom only a few specialists can 
remember today) over Mendeleev when 
they had to elect a new colleague to their 
institution. They cited the modest amount of 
research Mendeleev had carried out in the 
field of chemistry. 
No one is a prophet in his own land! 
Mendeleev is no exception. Even so, 
his prophecies about natural resources 
management – and sustainable 
development in general – are just as 
important as the periodic law and the 
periodic table of elements, which raised  
his name to the ranks of the most famous 
Russian scholars.  
The International Year 2019, and the 
worldwide recognition of  the periodic 
table of elements, underline once again 
the need to develop systems in our chaotic 
world. After all, it is systems that allow us to 
understand the very idea of regularity and 
give us the predictive capacity to meet the 
challenges of sustainable development.
Co-chair of the International Year of the 
Periodic Table of the Elements Inter-union 
Management Committee, Russian scientist 
Natalia Tarasova is director of the Institute 
of Chemistry and Problems of Sustainable 
Development at the D. Mendeleev 
University of Chemical Technology of 
Russia. She is one of the pioneers of 
sustainable development research in 
Russia.
A Russian chemist and professor at the 
D. Mendeleev University of Chemical 
Technology of Russia, Dmitry Mustafin 
is an author, presenter, scientific editor 
and guest expert on numerous television 
programmes and films for the general 
public.
