2014 was a watershed year for humanity: 
for the first time in history, more than half 
of the world’s population now lives in 
cities. By current estimates, this will rise 
to seventy per cent by 2050. These cities 
of tomorrow will, in many ways, mirror 
their forbearers; from the early city-states 
of Mesopotamia, to the Italian cities of 
the Renaissance, to the megacities of 
today – cities have historically advanced 
human development, serving as melting 
pots for people of diverse backgrounds to 
exchange and dialogue. 
Yet the cities of today and tomorrow 
are also facing new, unprecedented 
challenges. Although occupying only 
two per cent of the world’s landmass, 
they consume sixty per cent of global 
energy, release seventy-five per cent of 
greenhouse gas emissions and produce 
seventy per cent of global waste. As cities 
expand, they threaten biodiversity, and 
place urban infrastructure and resources 
– from water to transport to electricity – 
under enormous strain, multiplying the 
impact of natural disasters and climate 
change. Unchecked development and 
mass tourism place cultural heritage 
sites and living heritage practices at 
risk. Rising inequality and migration – 
driven in many cases by conflict and 
disaster – make cities the focal points for 
new social cleavages, for exclusion and 
discrimination.
Given the magnitude of these challenges, 
cities across the globe have concluded 
that new ways of thinking, citizen 
engagement and, crucially, city-to-city 
cooperation, are the only paths forward. 
Editorial
We have seen this at UNESCO, which is 
home to no less than five city networks, 
each of which is working to harness the 
extraordinary capacity for innovation and 
connection that is a hallmark of cities. 
For instance, cities account for seventy 
per cent of the global economy, including 
a large portion of the creative economy, 
which generates annual global revenues 
of $2,250 billion and employs more 
young people than any other sector. 
That is why the 180 cities that form the 
UNESCO Creative Cities Network are 
working to leverage the ability of cities 
to bring creative people together, to 
spark economic growth, to foster a sense 
of community and to preserve urban 
identities. UNESCO’s Global Network 
of Learning Cities is working to make 
cities sustainable by ensuring that all 
urban residents can benefit from lifelong 
learning. From learning to ride a bicycle 
to make the urban environment cleaner, 
learning to make local products using 
traditional practices and knowledge or 
organizing community theatre workshops 
in marginalized neighbourhoods, each 
new educational opportunity brings with 
it the potential for social transformation 
and development. 
As one of the world’s foremost 
laboratories of ideas, UNESCO is working 
to bring these networks of cities together, 
encouraging them to exchange and 
collaborate on the policies and practices 
that can respond to the growing needs 
of urban residents. The Pulitzer-winning 
journalist, Herb Caen, once said, “A city is 
not gauged by its length and width, but 
by the broadness of its vision and the 
height of its dreams.” UNESCO believes 
that when cities share these dreams, and 
take inspiration from the vision of others, 
they can overcome the challenges of our 
new urban era. 
This issue of the UNESCO Courier is full 
of stories of creativity, innovation and 
resilience. I hope they inspire you, and 
perhaps push you to engage with these 
issues in your own city or community. 
Audrey Azoulay, 
Director-General of UNESCO
The probability of a city, 
imaginary urban map by French artist 
Fabrice Clapiès. 
© Fabrice Clapiès
