It is at the heart of all economic survival 
strategies, especially among young 
people, who make up more than half of 
the city’s population.
Creativity born 
of necessity
Like the chargeurs, who fill the gaps in the 
home electricity distribution system now 
that mobile phones are hugely successful, 
other inhabitants show remarkable 
ingenuity by inventing diverse sources 
of income, taking advantage of every 
opportunity to make themselves useful. 
Starting with next to nothing, they launch 
new activities to meet different needs.
A table, a bench, some cooking utensils 
and charcoal are enough to set up a 
malewa, or cheap restaurant where 
you can eat for ten times less than 
anywhere else – even if hygiene is 
sometimes compromised. Are the buses 
overcrowded? No problem! The wewas 
(motorcycle taxis) are there to transport 
you. Are the streets flooded after the 
rain? All right, back carriers will ferry 
pedestrians across. Others, like second-
hand spare-part dealers, mobile-phone 
repairers, or bottled-water vendors, are 
also at hand to help you out at any time.
A colloquial terminology is developing 
to keep up with these new activities, 
characterized by intermediation. The 
gap left by the lack of organization of 
public and private infrastructures is 
filled by all kinds of agents, brokers and 
subcontractors who offer their services 
individually or through networks.
Sylvie Ayimpam 
How do you survive when you’re poor and caught up in an 
interminable series of social and economic crises? You learn how 
to get by! This is the motto of the inhabitants of Kinshasa in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Showing great ingenuity, they 
never miss an opportunity to invent a new job. Romains, chargeurs, 
and other gaddafis swarm the markets and streets of the megacity, 
closing the gaps in the system. 
Street smarts
in Kinshasa
We are in the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo. The scene takes place in the 
city centre of Kinshasa, the capital. Three 
young shoe-shine boys sit on rocks at 
the entrance of a school, equipped with 
stools, footrests, brushes and sponges. 
Next to them, a young man has set up 
a stand and watches over a cleverly-
crafted electric charging system. On a 
small wooden panel, he has mounted 
several electrical outlets which are illicitly 
connected to electrical wires emerging 
from the ground, where they are attached 
to the base of a defective street light. This 
man calls himself the chargeur (charger).
While shoe-shine boys have long been 
an integral part of the urban landscape, 
battery chargers have emerged at the 
same time as mobile telephones. In the 
1970s and 1980s, the city was full of 
micro-production units – shoe or paint 
factories, carpenters or jewellers, weaving 
or dyeing workshops sprouted like 
mushrooms, mainly in backyards. Since 
the mid-1990s, small businesses and 
services have taken over. 
You have to know how to fend for 
yourself if you live in Kinshasa, among 
some 11 million inhabitants. The 
economic crisis, the failures of the state 
and public services, and the scarcity of 
salaried jobs are forcing city dwellers to 
earn their living through various forms of 
self-employment made up of small tasks 
and expediencies.
In a context of anomy and extreme 
poverty, la débrouille – the French word 
for resourcefulness, making do, getting 
by or improvising – has become a way 
of life at which city dwellers excel. 
Kinshasa, market town.

Plying their trades in the streets and 
markets, but also in any place of 
commercial transaction, including car 
parks, major intersections, bus stations 
and river ports, are romains (dealers in 
smuggled merchandise), bana kwatas 
(touts dealing in second-hand clothes), 
chayeurs (wholesalers’ agents), gaddafis 
(informal fuel-sellers), chargeurs (touts 
working for taxis and public transport, not 
to be confused with battery chargers!), 
cambistes (street money-changers), and 
mamas manoeuvre (middlemen trading 
food products in river ports).
Article 15
In the mid-1980s, the song “Article 15, 
Beta Libanga” by the Congolese musician 
Pépé Kallé (1951-1998), was a big hit 
across the continent, probably because 
so many Africans could identify with 
it. Article 15 is an imaginary article in 
the DRC Constitution that says: “Make 
do to survive!” All the Congolese know 
it and refer to it on a daily basis. “Beta 
libanga” literally means “Break the stone”. 
“Making do is not easy,” Kallé warns us.
“Article 15, my dears, make do to survive,” 
he sang in Lingala. “Look at the river port: 
the dock workers carry heavy loads. Look 
at the bus conductors: they shout from 
morning to night. Look, there are stalls 
all over the city. Look at the taxi and bus 
drivers: they drive from morning to night. 
Look at us, the musicians: we sing to earn 
our living. Look at the students: they 
study to prepare for the future.”
But the future we dream of, often 
remains distant, and in the meantime, 
we get by in Kinshasa, as in many 
other African cities. Resourcefulness 
has become a way of being, a marker 
of urban identity that spans the entire 
Kinshasa social space. The informal 
economy, which proliferates mainly 
due to chronic shortages, poverty and 
political instability, is far from being free 
of schemes, swindles, risks, conflict and 
violence. Nevertheless, it also includes 
social values, such as conviviality, 
solidarity, respect and loyalty. Ultimately, 
it contributes to a form of social 
self-regulation.
Admittedly, in the midst of an 
incomplete modernity, institutions are 
bankrupt, administrations shaky, civil 
society unstructured and traditions 
worthless. Yet what never ceases to 
amaze in Kinshasa is the resourcefulness 
and creativity of the people struggling to 
get by, reflecting the inventive spirit of 
individuals and the community.
A Congolese social scientist affiliated 
with the Institut des mondes africains 
(IMAF) in Aix-en-Provence, France, 
Sylvie Ayimpam’s work focuses on 
the issue of the informal economy 
in African cities. She is the author of 
Économie de la débrouille à Kinshasa. 
Informalité, commerce et réseaux sociaux 
(The economy of resourcefulness in 
Kinshasa. Informality, commerce and 
social networks), 2014. 
