my second novel, I moved part of my 
plot to Brooklyn, opposite Manhattan, 
I was obeying this need to ward off my 
subject. I distanced it twice: first to New 
York, which I knew well from going 
there frequently, but where I did not live; 
and then to Brooklyn, which is not the 
New York we imagine, from France. This 
decentring was certainly fundamental 
for me, it gradually tipped me towards 
the novel – before that, my first story was 
very autobiographical.
But this shift had an unexpected 
effect: it imposed a space on me. As I 
intentionally moved away from more 
familiar territories, I suddenly had to 
increase my documentation, verifying 
details, the effects of reality, images. 
I discovered, at the heart of fiction, at 
the heart of its fabrication, a complex 
entanglement of reality and words: 
I needed the displacement that the 
foreign city offered me, but as soon as 
the story was situated, I needed reality 
to feed it. Not brute reality – otherwise 
I would have remained in Paris, at 
home – but mediatized reality, images, 
symbols, fragments, words. Starting from 
memories, but also from testimonies, 
photos, stories, novels and films, maps, 
I had to recompose a space, make it 
“real”, give back this city its circus life.
Blind to each other
I have the greatest admiration for writers 
whose imaginations unfold in the great 
natural spaces, like Cormac McCarthy, but 
I had other reasons, for myself, to prefer 
the space of the city to move my novels 
in. This is because I also had the idea that 
modern fiction must account for our 
blind journeys and our anonymity. Today 
in Paris, I live in a building where people 
greet each other by lowering their heads 
when they meet in the elevator. In the 
Metro, most of the time, they scarcely 
dare to look each other in the face. 
Thomas B. Reverdy 
The French writer Thomas 
B. Reverdy has almost always 
chosen urban spaces as the 
setting for his novels. Obsessed 
by the “unbearable presence of 
absence” in our dehumanized 
cities, he imagines the 
emergence of tiny resistances.
The city,
a circus under a starlit tent
“These are cities!” The words, famous, 
are from Rimbaud. This is the sentence 
that opens one of the Illuminations, in 
which the poet describes not a city, 
but a circus tent, its machines and its 
inhabitants-acrobats, the myriad spaces, 
acts, routes and noises that populate 
it, chaotic, blind to each other, and yet 
regulated like a music score. Around 
1872, three years after the posthumous 
publication of Baudelaire’s Le Spleen 
de Paris [Paris Spleen], the city had thus 
become an image. It could be used as a 
metaphor, and this metaphor did not say 
what a city is, but what it evokes. Not the 
production, the commerce, but already 
the displacements, the anonymity, the 
trades being lost and the poverty that 
is suddenly noticeable in the cracks of 
apparent wealth. Since the island of 
Thomas More, most utopias are urban. 
All dystopias are. The city is an imaginary 
place. A show. A circus.
Travelling places
I have almost always placed the setting 
of my plots in the city. I should say I 
have moved it to the city. Cities make it 
possible to be everywhere, both at home 
and abroad, and this displacement is 
fundamental. It is the step sideways, the 
oblique vision, it is the gap in reality, the 
displacement that suddenly creates space 
for the deployment of fiction. When, in 
The ephemeral world of fairgrounds, 
as seen by French artist Cyrille Weiner. 
Untitled No. 9, from the Jour de Fêtes 
(Holiday) series, 2016.

It is rare to be able to make an entire trip 
around the city without coming across at 
least one person who is talking to himself 
in a disturbing way, one or two beggars, a 
visibly sociopathic and perhaps psychotic 
individual, and at some stations, a 
drug addict at the end of the platform, 
smoking crack. Sometimes, someone 
you’ve seen before. A person we may 
have come across in the neighbourhood 
or on the Metro at the same time. But 
we’ll never know what her name is, or 
what she does for a living, or why she 
looks happy that day. This beggar who 
speaks loudly and chooses his words, with 
his slight foreign accent, where does he 
come from and how did he find his way 
here? These young people who appear 
disguised, are they going to a party? To 
a concert? What are they studying? Who 
do they dream of becoming and will they 
make it? These are the modern fictions. 
We are an anonymous people, advancing 
in our miniscule lives, blind to each other. 
Our existences timed by the schedules 
of the suburban trains, still resist a little, 
deep in our hearts, the city-machine, but 
we must admit that a simple encounter 
has become a miracle. We can no 
longer write the lives of Julien Sorel, 
Frédéric Moreau or Bel-Ami1 today.
There were the terrorist attacks, too. 
It may perhaps be because of that. 
September 112. All the names engraved 
since in black stone, to give a name to the 
nameless. Today’s heroes are anonymous.
1. Names of the protagonists of French novels: 
Julien Sorel in The Red and the Black (1830) by Stendhal; 
Frédéric Moreau in Sentimental Education (1869) by 
Gustave Flaubert; Bel-Ami is the nickname of the main 
character of Guy de Maupassant’s novel of the same 
name (1885).
2. Reference to the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 
that targeted symbolic buildings in the United States. 

Cities make it 
possible to be 
everywhere, 
both at home 
and abroad

Fragile, like a human 
memory
I returned to New York in 2008 to 
write L’Envers du monde (Towards the 
World). The action is set in the crater of 
Ground Zero, in 2003. A racist murder is 
committed, at least it is assumed that it 
is racist. We follow the characters who 
revolve around this story as if around 
an empty centre, an incomprehensible 
absence, and it is obviously the shadow 
of the twin towers that looms. The city 
here offers another of its characteristics, 
which could be called its geology: the city 
is made up of strata. It forgets them in its 
use, but the places bear the traces. 
The city makes History part of our daily lives. 
2003 was the time when the United States 
was transitioning from the punitive war in 
Afghanistan to the preventive war in Iraq. 
It was also the year that Daniel Libeskind’s 
magnificent project was accepted. The 
Ground Zero crater, historic and symbolic, 
where the towers of the World Trade Center 
had turned inside out like a glove in the 
ground, this place laden with meaning 
became a strange and transient place – it 
was no longer the esplanade of the Twin 
Towers and it was not yet the Freedom 
Tower. A place of memory as fragile as a 
human memory. It seemed to me it was 
the work of art today, to establish this kind 
of place that is also a moment. The work of 
Libeskind, admirable in its intelligence, also 
says this in its own way by digging, at the 
site of the vanished towers, those endless 
shafts of shadows that imprint, in the space, 
the place of the absent towers. 
Because that’s what mourning is, like 
memory, like ruin, and the cursed material 
of the writer, or of any artist, this is what it 
is: the unbearable presence of absence.
I started tracking it. In Japan, post-
Fukushima3, where I lived to write Les 
Evaporés (The Evaporated), in which a 
man who deliberately disappears crosses 
the path of the damned uprooted by 
the disaster. I tracked it down to Detroit, 
Michigan, where an entire metropolis 
was sinking into bankruptcy, two-thirds 
of its inhabitants fleeing, swept away by 
the economic and financial crisis of 2008. 
Detroit, the machine city, the city of Ford 
and General Motors (GM), the Metropolis4 
of the American dream that devoured 
its children. Detroit that was suffocating 
without inhabitants, the first city of this 
size to experience this, like the canary in 
the coal mine, warned those who accused 
banks and the business community of 
being irresponsible. Detroit, whose ruins, 
like those of another distant civilization, 
of factories, supermarkets, schools and 
theatres, invaded by vegetation, resembled 
a sort of tragic Planet of the Apes5. 
 
3. Reference to the catastrophic nuclear accident in 
Fukushima, Japan, in March 2011. 
4. Metropolis is a sci-fi film by Austrian-born German-
American director Fritz Lang, made in 1927 and 
inscribed on UNESCO’s Memory of the World register. 
A dystopian vision of the twenty-first-century city. 
5. The Planet of the Apes is a science-fiction novel 
(1963) by the French writer Pierre Boulle, which 
inspired American director Tim Burton’s film of the 
same name in 2001, and also series of films produced 
by Twentieth Century Fox, the US film studio. The 
American media franchise also covers television 
series, books, comics, and video games.
The anguished and prophetic dream of 
a planet rid of us.
I didn’t go to Detroit while I was writing 
the novel. There were countless photos, 
stories by journalists like Charlie LeDuff 
of the Detroit Free Press, and others. 
Getting information, knowing what was 
happening, where to place things, was 
not a problem. On the contrary, Detroit 
was documented to saturation. The 
problem was getting out.
Resisting the charm 
of the Pied Piper
One of my ideas was the analogy of 
this automobile crisis with the German 
medieval tale of The Pied Piper of Hamelin 
– a village in the throes of the plague calls 
in a magic flute player, who takes the rats 
far away from the village and drowns 
them in the river. But when he comes 
back, they refuse to pay him: they don’t 
have the money. The ruthless Pied Piper 
then casts a spell on all the children of the 
village and takes them away with him. 
He drowns them in the river. 
At the beginning of the twentieth 
century, the Pied Piper of industrial 
capitalism attracted all the poor workers 
in the rural south of the US, many of them 
blacks, to Detroit, with the promise of a 
bright future. At that time, the Pied Piper 
sold houses and cars on credit. 

But when people did not want to pay the 
price, when they rebelled during the 1967 
Detroit riots, the Pied Piper was offended. 
He left for China with the jobs, and in 
Detroit people fell back into poverty little 
by little. In spite of its cruelty, this tale 
appealed to a child’s imagination. One 
of the stories in the novel, therefore, is 
about a group of runaway children who 
take advantage of the disorganization of 
public transport and schools in the city, to 
live a kind of adventure, in a vacant lot, an 
abandoned school. Something that was 
a little bit like Treasure Island6. 
But I had a problem with reality. My 
story was set between two bankruptcies: 
that of Lehman Brothers, 15 September 
2008, and that of General Motors7, 1 June 
2009. These were historical and objective 
milestones. However, the kids couldn’t 
survive all that time. I started following 
them on the eve of All Saints’ Day, on 
Devil’s Night8: they were setting fire to 
an abandoned house. A few days later, 
they run away. It’s early November. 
 
6. Treasure Island (1883) is an adventure novel by the 
Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson.
7. Lehman Brothers was a multinational investment 
bank that collapsed, in its 158th year, in September 
2008, triggering a global financial crisis. General 
Motors is a US carmaker, which was placed under US 
bankruptcy protection in June 2009.
8. Devil’s Night, 30 October, is the night before 
Halloween.
I finally decide they can hold on until 
Christmas. It’s a reasonable maximum. But 
that forces me to twist the whole reality.
In the novel, GM is no longer GM, it 
becomes “the Company”. The chronology 
is disrupted. I have all my documentation 
in two months. And suddenly, everything 
is clear. The logic of fiction imposes 
itself on reality. If my story of dystopia, 
bankruptcy and urban jungle runs until 
Christmas, then I go into the winter. 
It’s cold in Detroit in the winter. And 
suddenly, this city of which I had seen a 
thousand images becomes a bit more 
than a backdrop. It comes alive in an 
organic way. I mentally observe the 
snow falling on the lawns, muffling the 
sound of footsteps. I see the wind rushing 
through the empty windows of vacant 
buildings, whistling as it turns around 
the abandoned houses. I can feel the 
cold with its metallic taste creeping into 
humid clothes that nothing can warm up 
again. I see the halos of street lighting go 
out, replaced by the mysterious glitter 
of the snow under the silvery moon. 
And this Detroit of phantasmagoria, of 
fiction, is no more real than the real one 
– in the real Detroit at that time, people 
were dying every day. But it becomes 
communicable, representable. In the 
machine city, we can once again imagine 
human destinies. Tiny resistances. If the 
story runs until Christmas, it’s because 
it’s a tale, which doesn’t have to be cruel. 
Maybe the kids will make it.
And the city becomes a circus once 
again, where the destinies of anonymous 
acrobats play out, without a net, sliding 
from trapeze to trapeze, brushing each 
other without seeing each other, catching 
each other in flight, in the hope of a rest, 
of an encounter, like a miracle at the 
height of man, under the starlit tent. 
French author Thomas B. Reverdy 
has received numerous awards for 
his novels, notably for Les Derniers Feux 
(The Last Fires, 2008), L’Envers du monde 
(Towards the World, 2010), Les Évaporés 
(The Evaporated, 2013), Il était une ville 
(There was a City, 2015) and L’Hiver 
du mécontentement (The Winter of 
Discontent, 2018).
At the beginning of the 
twentieth century, the 
Pied Piper of industrial 
capitalism attracted all 
the poor workers in 
the rural south of the US, 
many of them blacks, to 
Detroit, with the promise 
of a bright future 

Panoramic photomontage from the 
Les présences désagrégées (Disaggregated 
attendances) series, Paris 1998-2000, 
by Italian artist Silvana Reggiardo.
