It is our highway and our supermarket. 
Today our ocean is a shadow of its former 
self – increasingly polluted, acidified, 
overfished, warmer and rising. 
For thousands of years our parents have 
taught us to respect and care for the 
ocean. But the forces that attack and 
damage our ocean today are beyond our 
control to manage.
We are a sailing people. We have always 
sailed and our ‘canoes’ were the fastest and 
largest sailing ships in the world when the 
Europeans first sailed into our ocean.



Returning to the
Lau Islands, all sails out
Fuluna Tikoidelaimakotu Tuimoce
“For thousands of years our 
parents have taught us to respect 
and care for the ocean. But the 
forces that attack and damage 
our ocean today are beyond our 
control to manage,” declares 
Fuluna Tikoidelaimakotu 
Tuimoce, a young sailor from Fiji. 
This is his testimony.
My name is Fuluna Tikoidelaimakotu 
Tuimoce. It tells you who I am and where 
I am from. I come from a small country, 
Fiji, in the middle of the world's greatest 
ocean, the Pacific. I live in a small village, 
Korova, near Suva, the capital. But my 
people are from an even smaller island, 
Moce (“mo-they”), in the Lau group.
We are an ocean people. For most of our 
history of millennia living on the Pacific 
Ocean, the land is a place we go to rest. 
The ocean is our real home. The ocean 
has always provided for us, fed us and 
protected us.  

In the eighteenth century, Captain Cook 
described how the Tu'i Tonga "sailed 
around our ship as if we sat at anchor". The 
Tu'i Tonga was a drua [a double-hulled 
traditional sailing boat] built in my home 
of the Lau Islands. It was bigger than 
Cook's ship, with more men, three times 
faster than Cook's and capable of sailing 
as close to windward as a modern yacht.
Pinnacle 
of technological 
achievement
The drua was the pinnacle of 
technological achievement. They 
were built without metal, using 
only wood, grass, nuts, stone, bone 
and sharkskin. Using all the learned 
knowledge of thousands of years 
of ocean sailing, our ancestors in 
our tiny islands built thousands of 
these great craft and exported them 
throughout the central Pacific. Every 
island had its own transport, powered 
by free and continuously available 
renewable energy.
The reports of all European 
explorers described the Pacific as an 
ocean covered by sails. We were a 
mobile people. 
Despite the cyclones, tsunamis and 
other natural disasters, which are 
common in the Pacific, our ancestors 
never saw the ocean as a barrier. They 
never talked about being 'vulnerable', 
'isolated', 'remote': our drua – our 
ability to sail at will – meant we were 
always connected. We were not "small", 
"islands" or "developing" countries. 
We were – and still are – large ocean 
communities. 
The islands of the Lau group are often 
described as beautiful, idyllic, unspoilt 
and our people as one of the most 
hospitable and friendly in the world. 
And so we are. 
A train wreck
But the reality is more complex: our 
Pacific countries are on the frontline of 
climate change. Not that it's any fault 
of ours, but we are on a slow-moving 
train wreck that now drives us from our 
coasts and atolls, that turns our oceans 
to an acidic, plastic-filled soup, that 
bleaches our coral and destroys our 
water and food supplies. For some of us, 
it will entirely destroy our homes, our 
countries and our cultures. For all of us, 
it means unprecedented change, often 
beyond the capacity of our elders to 
guide us or our children to prepare for. 
My village has never had an outboard 
motor. We are one of a handful of 
communities that still sail on our ocean. 
My elders are the last that still know 
how to build and maintain sailing 
canoes. My own father died when I was 
three years old, sailing one of the last 
drua from the Lau to Suva. 
My community is a remnant of what 
it once was. Our canoes are small – 
only shadows of the giant drua our 
grandfathers and their fathers built. We 
use them every day to go to the reef, to 
fish and forage for our supplies. But we 
can now only dream of the day when 
our chiefs send us out to sail in great 
fleets to other countries on the other 
side of our known world.
A child's dream  
So what can be done? We are not 
accepting our fate passively. There is a 
renaissance of our seafaring heritage 
occurring across our ocean. In the last 
few years, I have been fortunate enough 
to sail with a small fleet of ocean-going 
canoes from across the Pacific.
We have crossed our ocean repeatedly 
– from island to island and now from 
continent to continent – America and 
Australia – spreading our message 
of hope that the world can wake up 
from its self-induced globalization and 
consumer-good driven coma in time to 
stop the senseless destruction of our 
ocean and our planet. 
There are signs that the revitalization 
of canoe culture is now happening in 
every small corner of our ocean – from 
Manus Island in Papua New Guinea to 
Namdrik Atoll in the Marshall Islands to 
the archipelagos of French Polynesia. 
We know it is only a small step, one that 
is not likely to be enough to turn back 
the rising tide.
But if we lose our sailing culture, we 
surely lose everything. Our canoes were 
once called Waqa Tabu – sacred ships. 
They are our icons, our heritage, our 
definition of who and what we are. They 
are symbols of a time when we did live in 
tune with wind and wave, when we were 
truly big people on a great ocean. 
The linkage with the past that our 
canoes provide is not quite severed. 
Although we have little resourcing, 
we are moving now to ensure the 
knowledge that is still held by our elders 
does not pass from this earth when 
they do – but that it is recorded for 
generations to come. We are building 
new canoes, only small ones at first, but 
we continue to plan for the day when we 
launch our drua upon the waters of the 
Pacific again.
We must start from the beginning. 
Preparation for the future begins with 
the lessons of the past. When we were 
children, our parents taught us to make 
Bakanawa – model drua that we raced 
after school and on weekends. I consider 
myself to be the most fortunate of my 
generation – one of only a few that 
grew up sailing on the ocean the ways 
my ancestors have done for thousands 
of years.
So what can I do in the face of climate 
change? It seems the best thing I can 
do is to build a drua and sail it back to 
the Lau. 
A young sailor from the Republic 
of Fiji, Fuluna Tikoidelaimakotu 
Tuimoce has become the voice of the 
peoples of the sea. He delivered a vivid 
testimony at the conference Indigenous 
peoples on the front lines of climate 
change, held at UNESCO on 26 and 27 
November 2015.
Thirty "Pacific Climate Warriors" 
representing twelve island nations, 
joined hundreds of Australians, 
to block the world's largest coal port 
in Newcastle, Australia, to protest 
against climate change and its effects, 
in October 2014.
© Jeff TAN
