About a decade later, in 1993, the state 
adopted a decree, making the city centre 
a priority preservation area. A Master 
Plan for the restoration of Old Havana 
was quickly drafted, overseen by the 
Office of the City Historian of Havana 
(see our interview, p. 18).
The effects of climate and urban growth 
have taken their toll on the old quarter, 
which has suffered severe deterioration 
since the beginning of the twentieth 
century. Cuba has rallied together to save 
its city. “It is impossible to rescue 465 years 
of stone overnight, but Old Havana will 
be saved. Its splendid face will be restored 
and be converted, not into a lifeless 
museum but into a museum that is living 
and can be lived in,” wrote Pereira, thirty-
five years ago. Time has proved him right. 
Based on a self-management strategy 
and adopting an approach that 
encompasses heritage, society, education 
and culture, the Cuban plan has 
become a model for the restoration and 
enhancement of historical urban centres, 
particularly in Latin American countries. 
Jasmina Šopova
Havana is finalizing 
preparations for a grand 
celebration of the 500th 
anniversary of its founding, in 
November 2019. Emblematic 
buildings in the historic 
centre of the Cuban capital 
are being restored. An 
exceptional renaissance has 
been underway for the past 
three decades, driven by the 
commitment of its inhabitants, 
the determination of one 
unyielding man, and a strong 
political will. 
Havana:
Where everyone pitches in 
Recognized by international experts, the 
plan has won over twenty-five national 
and global awards and figures on 
UNESCO’s list of best practices in world 
heritage management. 
One feature of the plan is that it involved 
the local population in the rehabilitation 
of their quarter. Over the years, more than 
14,000 jobs, calling for different degrees 
of expertise, have been created by the 
Office of the City Historian for residents of 
the old town and nearby communities. 
An education system has been set up 
specifically to meet the needs of the plan. 
It integrates the University of Havana, 
founded in 1728, and three specialist 
schools, to offer training to students aged 
16 to 21. Twelve subjects are taught there, 
over a two-year period. To date, around 
1,500 young people have been trained in 
vocations related to the restoration and 
rehabilitation of cultural heritage.
“What the heart demands, the hand 
performs.” This proverb, engraved in 
Chinese ideograms on the roof of one 
of the most magnificent buildings in 
Havana, expresses the love that its 
inhabitants have for their city. “A land 
of passage for so many years, people 
of the most diverse origins from Africa, 
Europe, China, Yucatán have met here 
in a kaleidoscopic amalgam that has 
produced our unique but varied ethnic, 
ethical and aesthetic identity,” wrote 
the Cuban author, Manuel Pereira, in his 
article, Enchanted seashell: a portrait 
of Old Havana, published in the Courier 
in July 1984. 
That was two years after the inscription of 
the historic centre of the Cuban capital on 
UNESCO’s World Heritage List. Old Havana 
comprises of more than 3,000 buildings, 
housing 50,000 people today.
A scene from everyday life in Havana, 
against the backdrop of the Capitolio, 2015.

The Museum Classroom project brings 
primary schools and museums together 
to teach young children about the history 
of Old Havana. This is one of many ways 
to raise public awareness of heritage 
values among people of all ages. The City 
Historian’s office, which has established 
these values, also promotes them. 
Thousands of families have benefited 
from cultural tours of the city, watched 
Havana Walks on television or read 
the monthly series, Habana Nuestra 
(Our Havana), in print and online. 
Once subsidized by the state, the 
restoration of the historic centre now 
benefits from a system of self-financing, 
with the development of a local economy. 
Companies and tourism agencies 
were started to create a gastronomic, 
commercial and hotel network in the 
priority protection area, compatible 
with the cultural interests of the quarter. 
Museums, galleries and theatres have also 
been established in the most beautiful 
buildings, attracting a large number of 
national and foreign visitors – tourism 
is one of the most important sources of 
finance for the restoration of Old Havana.
Since the quality of life of its inhabitants is 
one of the main criteria of the restoration 
plan, a significant part of the resources 
it generates are used to finance social 
institutions. These include the Doña 
Leonor Pérez Cabrera maternity hospital, 
the Santiago Ramón y Cajal geriatric 
centre, which provides specialized care 
to around 15,000 elderly people, and 
the former Belén convent, which houses 
the Office for Humanitarian Affairs. 
This department focuses on the most 
vulnerable members of society, including 
victims of natural disasters, such as the 
frequent hurricanes. Here they have access 
to a pharmacy, a physiotherapy centre, 
an ophthalmology clinic, and also a food 
store, a hairdresser and a barber. Socio-
cultural activities and meetings for people 
of all ages are organized here, including 
workshops on the environment, traditional 
medicine, and other topics of interest. 
The development of squares, green 
areas, pedestrian streets and recreational 
spaces, and municipal services like street 
lighting, gas supply, waste collection and 
the cleaning of public spaces are all an 
integral part of this massive reconstruction 
plan. The most fundamental aspects – like 
making sure that people living in buildings 
under renovation are not rendered 
homeless – have not been neglected 
either. Through the plan, more than 
11,000 families have so far benefited from 
a decent roof over their heads.

