One of the big problems with 4IR is that 
the winner takes all. In South Africa, we 
had a local search engine, called Anansi, 
which aggressively gathered local data, 
but it was no match for Google – it has 
since folded, in 2011. Few people can 
name the world’s number two search 
engine – the answer is Microsoft’s Bing, 
but even they’re struggling. There is no 
room for a number two – the fact that 
Google is not available in China is a huge 
advantage for Chinese companies. 
However, the web giants, like most 
corporations, don’t spend a lot of time 
dealing with local issues. For instance, 
Google Maps does not pronounce 
the names on our local routes well. 
If we produced our own domestic 
maps with the right pronunciations, 
we would have an edge over Google. 
The key to competition is to address 
challenges locally. 
How far are African countries from 
becoming producers of 4IR technology? 
I think we produce a lot of technology, to 
be honest. I hear a lot about Elon Musk, 
and his Tesla car, but South Africa had the 
Joule [an electric five-seater passenger 
car], which was shelved because it would 
have had to sell a million units to be 
viable. We register a lot of patents, but 
our markets are just not big enough, so 
our products are dying in laboratories. 
The economics dictate that you need to 
sell huge amounts to survive. It’s not just 
creating the technology that matters. 
We need to create new markets and build 
an effective export strategy. 
Artificial
intelligence,
at Africa’s door
Tshilidzi Marwala, interviewed by Edwin Naidu, South African journalist
African leaders must embrace technology and use the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution (4IR) to drive the continent out of poverty 
and into a better future, argues leading South African scientist and 
artificial intelligence (AI) expert Tshilidzi Marwala. 
This interview is published on the occasion of World Africa Day, 
celebrated at UNESCO on 25 May. 
Those with adequate capital to buy 
industrial robots will produce more with 
fewer resources and will become very 
wealthy, while the rest will be relegated 
to the margins of society. 
South Africa, and the African Continent, 
have no choice but to embrace 4IR and 
use it to find solutions to the plethora of 
problems facing us. 
Are all African governments investing 
in 4IR ?
I don’t think that is the case, even though 
there are some pockets of excellence to 
be found in Mozambique, Congo, Kenya, 
Rwanda, and South Africa, to some 
extent. Mobilizing on an issue like 4IR in 
a continent with fifty-four countries is 
a lot more complicated than handling 
one country, even if it is as big as China. 
Considering that the countries are at 
different stages of development makes 
the situation even more complex.
I believe that 4IR is going to be about 
data – whether it is the data of people, 
genetic data, or the data that drives 4IR 
itself. The question we must ask is, are 
African countries obtaining data? The 
answer, I am afraid, is no. The biggest 
data capturers in Africa are United States 
multinationals. When it comes to data 
collection or management, Africa would 
score three, on a scale of one to ten. This 
figure is alarming.
In the late 1980s, the Chinese government 
invested in the economy, and has since 
lifted 800 million people out of poverty. 
Do you see the South African government 
being able to achieve similar results, 
albeit with a smaller population, through 
investment in 4IR*? 
It is thought that China may be the last 
country to manage to make money out of 
cheap labour to lift people out of poverty. 
If robots are used in the manufacturing 
process, it will probably be even cheaper 
than it has traditionally been in the past. 
Therefore, I am afraid 4IR may mark the 
cost of labour as a deterrent to employers, 
with the complete automation of the 
production process. 
Undoubtedly, 4IR will change the world of 
work with artificially intelligent machines 
performing tasks that were traditionally 
performed by humans. As a result, 
the world of work is already shrinking, 
with factories employing fewer people 
than before. There will be a marked 
increase in inequality.  
 
 
* The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) – being 
built on the widespread availability of digital 
technologies brought to us by the Third Industrial 
(or digital) Revolution – is driven by emerging 
technologies, based on a combination of digital, 
biological and physical innovations. These latest 
technologies, that are changing the way we live and 
work, include artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics, 
the Internet of Things (IoT), augmented reality, 
quantum computing, 3D printing, blockchain, 
additive manufacturing, neurotechnologies, 
geoengineering, and genome editing. 

Towards a Humanistic Approach
INTELLIGENCE
RTIFICIAL
Should corporations be playing a bigger 
role through public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) with governments on 4IR? 
Absolutely, corporations must play a 
big role. What I have observed, and this 
is a controversial view, is that there is a 
culture that does not consider Africa as 
a place to produce. For example, there is 
no plant in Africa making Apple products. 
Companies that have production in 
nations they operate in, are much easier 
to partner with than those merely 
bringing their products manufactured 
elsewhere into the country. 
What are some of the mechanisms that 
we need to put in place for multinationals 
to invest in production on the continent? 
In South Africa, the motor industry is a 
good example, where it is government 
policy to subsidize automobile 
companies who produce here.  
Currently, we do not have similar policies 
for companies participating in 4IR; we 
need to do that as we move forward. 
Creating special economic zones with 4IR 
in mind is a good idea, with governments 
providing companies with tax incentives 
that would promote production, job 
creation and help grow the economy. 
These incentives should not just be for 
foreign companies, but local businesses 
should be able to benefit from them too. 
This means that political leaders need 
to play an essential role in the process of 
introducing new technologies. 
One of the first things Africa needs to do 
is to start having leaders who understand 
technology. In Rwanda, the high-speed 
internet makes it obvious that President 
Paul Kagame understands technology. 
In Kenya, the number of 4IR startups and 
the launching of digital currency makes 
it clear that President Uhuru Kenyatta 
understands technology. 
In South Africa, President Cyril 
Ramaphosa is the first leader who 
has placed 4IR at the forefront of his 
strategy, and he is a big advocate for 
science and technology. In his State of 
the Nation address in February 2018, 
he talked about the digital industrial 
revolution, and has committed to the 
launch of a commission of experts on 
4IR to drive strategy. We need a national 
strategy, like India’s National Strategy for 
AI or the Made in China 2025 strategic 
manufacturing plan to transform itself 
into an innovative hi-tech powerhouse. 
Hopefully the commission driven by 
President Ramaphosa will create a 
strategy, mobilizing political, economic 
and social forces to put the economy on 
a good trajectory. 
The African continent now has 1.3 billion 
people and is still growing – it is the 
fastest-growing continent in terms of 
population. You are not going to be able 
to deal with the issues of population 
explosion, food security or urbanization 
without 4IR technology. 
Our leaders must understand technology 
– they must be developmental in their 
outlook. And this necessarily means that 
moving forward, we must start identifying 
new leaders with these qualities. 
One of South Africa’s leading experts on 
artificial intelligence, Tshilidzi Marwala 
is Vice-Chancellor of the University of 
Johannesburg. His extensive research on 
AI has been published in journals across 
the world, and he has won many awards 
both nationally and internationally. 
