You have to walk through the city’s 
streets to let yourself be invaded by the 
energy that drives it, and let yourself 
be drawn into its many unexpected 
corners, to meet at random a group that 
marches here, another that parks there 
– when it’s not a human tide protesting, 
brandishing banners and signs.
Silent marches and noisy demonstrations 
are frequent scenes in Warsaw. 
White flowers, black clothes, candles, 
firecrackers – all these mingle under a 
surge of white and red flags. But while 
some also bear the blue flag of Europe 
with its golden stars, others wave the 
black or the green flags of the nationalist 
patriots, nostalgic for a “Greater Poland 
from sea to sea”. While some proclaim: 
“Let us not leave democracy to die in 
silence!”, others demand a “pure Poland”, 
a “white Poland”.
This is the national paradox, which in 
recent years has turned into a veritable 
rupture between two Polands, which defy 
or ignore each other. And this rupture 
gushes forth in the public square, both 
literally and figuratively. 
Joanna Lasserre
Faced with mounting 
conservatism, progressive 
civil society in Warsaw is 
demonstrating a strong 
capacity for protest in order 
to defend democratic values. 
The “rebel” Polish capital – so 
often occupied, mistreated 
and destroyed – has held 
firm through many episodes 
of its history. It is still being 
reconstructed, in a constant 
quest for fulfilment.
Warsaw, the invincible city
Rebel city
Most often, the confrontation crystallizes 
in front of the presidential palace. Until 
April 2018, this was the arrival point of 
the religious procession that left the old 
town every tenth day of the month to 
commemorate – with a mass, prayers, 
hymns and speeches – the Smolensk 
disaster of 10 April 2010. On that day, 
ninety-six prominent people, including 
President Lech Kaczynski, were killed 
in a plane crash. A monthly ceremony, 
raised to the national level, was therefore 
to be repeated ninety-six times, till April 
2018. It occupied the historic centre of 
Warsaw and attracted crowds of citizens 
who turned up regularly to protest 
against what they considered to be an 
authoritarian and religious appropriation 
of the public space.
The citizens’ opposition to the nationalist 
trend started mobilizing in 2015, through 
a civic non-governmental organization, 
the Committee for the Defence of 
Democracy (KOD). On 13 December, 
the anniversary of the traumatic day 
when martial law was imposed in Poland 
by General Jaruzelski in 1981, tens of 
thousands of people march in Warsaw 
every year. The street demonstrations on 
that day in 2016 saw the largest turnout 
since the first free elections in 1989.  
Warsaw is not what you would call a 
beautiful city. It does not offer itself in all 
its magnificence to the hurried visitor, as 
does Krakow, the former Polish capital. 
A city with a hundred shades of grey, it 
was invaded by the younger generations 
after the fall of the communist regime in 
1989. They squatted in the abandoned 
factories and turned them into places 
of artistic creation. They defended 
the architecture of the communist 
period in the face of pressure from 
new real-estate developers. The Palace 
of Culture and Science, for example, a 
“gift” from Comrade Stalin, completed 
in 1955, still dominates the city centre 
today – whether its many critics like it 
or not. As imposing as it is unloved by 
the people of Warsaw, this immense 
building of more than 800,000 square 
metres was a veritable cultural multiplex 
before its time – housing museums, 
convention halls, workshops, theatres and 
art-house cinemas.
Over the last thirty years, a myriad of 
new meeting places – galleries, clubs, 
bars – have flourished here and there 
in post-communist Warsaw, which 
continues to attract students, executives 
of international companies, artists and 
adventurers from all over the world.
March through the old town of 
Warsaw in November 2018 to celebrate 
100 years of women’s suffrage.

The citizens of Warsaw, joined by 
protesters from around Poland, took 
this opportunity to challenge state 
manipulation of the constitution, 
institutions, and the rights of citizens, 
particularly women.
Women are at the forefront of all civil 
society movements, bringing together 
a large part of the society. In 2016, a 
draft bill to ban all abortions sparked 
mass nationwide strikes and protests. 
The proposed legislation would have 
drastically curtailed Poland’s already-
strict abortion laws, which allow for the 
voluntary termination of pregnancy only 
in cases of severe fetal malformation, if 
there was grave danger to the mother’s 
health, or if the pregnancy was a result of 
rape or incest. That time, the protesters 
won, and the government was forced to 
abandon the plan. 
But on 11 November 2017, when women 
sat on the Poniatowski Bridge to block 
the path of nationalists marching during 
Poland’s Independence Day, they were 
forcibly removed – and then brought 
to justice on charges of obstructing the 
freedom to protest.
The same scene is repeated every 
Independence Day. A handful of women, 
brandishing “Women against Fascism” 
banners, are pushed around by scores 
of men dressed in black, uttering sexist 
vulgarities, alternated with xenophobic, 
anti-Semitic and racist slogans.
The same mob shows up outside theatres. 
After each performance of a controversial 
play that contradicts the sacred codes 
of “Polishness”, the Powszechny Theatre 
prepares to face a new riot organized by 
small groups of the far-right. The theatre 
– along with Krzysztof Warlikowski’s 
New Theatre and some other famous 
theatres in the country – has always been 
a symbol of the struggle for the artistic 
freedom that remains a thorn in the side 
of authoritarian powers.
Could this be a coincidence? Poland’s 
student revolt in 1968 – a milestone in 
the struggle for liberation from Soviet 
oppression – began with the withdrawal 
of a classic, Adam Mickiewicz’s poetic 
drama, Dziady (Forefathers’ Eve) from the 
Warsaw National Theatre’s repertoire. 
From fall to reconquest, so goes the life 
of this amazing city that draws its ardour 
and energy from its human resources. 
The result was that in 1939, Warsaw 
looked like other European capitals. 
It had an elegant city centre and many 
areas inhabited by workers, who made 
up half its population. A large Jewish 
neighbourhood, teeming with life, 
spread over at least a third of the area, 
stretching from the centre to the north 
of the city.
It was then that the bombs of Germany’s 
invasion struck Warsaw, until the coup 
de grâce in October 1944. Hitler wanted 
to make the city an example of total 
annihilation, following the failed Warsaw 
Uprising led by the underground Polish 
resistance movement from August to 
October 1944. The city’s right bank 
was almost completely destroyed, and 
the surviving population deported. 
Warsaw was nothing more than a vast 
field of ruins, and the possibility of its 
reconstruction seemed doubtful, given 
the magnitude of the task.
Yet, as early as in January 1945, 
homeless revenants were already flocking 
to the banks of the Vistula, to stir up 
the frozen rubble.  

Rebel city
This wave of rebellion and freedom is not 
new in Warsaw. Does it come from its river 
that cannot be tamed? The Vistula, with 
its vast and steep valley that prevents the 
right and left banks from getting closer, 
remains impetuous and wild. Bordered 
by sand and bushes, it gives the city 
its character.
For a long time, Warsaw retained its 
rustic style. Its emancipation began in 
1915, under the reign of the Germans, 
who recaptured it from Russia during the 
First World War. Although it was severely 
exploited economically by the occupiers, 
the city was driven by an extraordinary 
determination and hope. Municipal 
elections were held, and the university 
and polytechnic opened. Warsaw was 
preparing to take on the role of capital of 
a sovereign state, which it finally attained 
at the end of the war, in 1918.
During the twenty short years 
following independence, the entire 
city became a construction site under 
Marshal Józef Piłsudski, a leader who 
was both adulated and controversial. 

They thus began, on their own initiative, 
a reconstruction that would soon turn 
into an extraordinary achievement 
for the entire nation. Fortunately, 
architecture offices and schools had 
clandestinely compiled inventories 
of historic buildings during the Nazi 
occupation. All was not lost. The market 
square, the town houses, the circuit 
of the ramparts, the Royal Castle and 
important religious buildings of the 
“invincible city”, as it was called then, 
would rise from the ashes – driven by a 
unifying national impetus encouraged 
by communist propaganda. This led to 
Warsaw’s inscription on the UNESCO 
World Heritage List in 1980. The Archive 
of Warsaw Reconstruction Office 
(BOS Archive), which kept track of this 
memorable period, was added to the 
Memory of the World Register in 2011. 
Demonstration outside the Royal Castle 
in Warsaw, July-August 2017, to protest 
against the monthly commemoration 
of the Smolensk plane crash.
From fall to 
reconquest, 
so goes the life 
of this amazing 
city that draws 
its ardour and 
its energy from 
its human resources 
Palimpsest city
Another fascinating chapter in Warsaw’s 
history is its ghetto. Many of us have 
heard about the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising 
in the spring of 1943 and its resistance, 
as determined as it was hopeless. But 
how many know the exact location 
of this huge enclosure, the largest in 
Nazi-occupied Europe? Built in 1940, 
it was erased from the map in 1943. 
Even the residents of Warsaw had only 
a vague idea of it, as the subject was 
taboo during the decades of communist 
rule. The barbed wire had disappeared, 
and when the city was liberated, only 
fragments of its eighteen-kilometre wall, 
several metres high, remained. It had 
been somewhere north of the Palace of 
Culture, it was said.
A new Warsaw was rising over the buried 
Jewish city, the memory of which would 
have vanished at the same time as its 
400,000 or 500,000 inhabitants, if one 
man had not survived. His name was 
Hersz Wasser. He was the assistant of the 
historian Emanuel Ringelblum, who, with 
some sixty friends, worked hard to build 
the clandestine archives of the Warsaw 
ghetto they inhabited during the Second 
World War. Some 25,000 pages, carefully 
filed in metal boxes, were extracted from 
the rubble between 1946 and 1950. These 
unique documents, collected in total 
secrecy, were inscribed in the Memory of 
the World Register just after the fall of the 
communist regime in 1989. 
Ringelblum and his team built a bridge 
from nothing towards the future. Defying 
all prohibition, they left us testimonies 
on the clandestine organizations, lists 
of deportees, chronicles, literary texts, 
works of art, diaries, private letters…. 
It was here, in the Ringelblum Archives, 
that we discovered the first detailed 
descriptions of the Chełmno and 
Treblinka extermination camps. Thanks to 
these archives, a team of contemporary 
researchers and writers have been able to 
reconstruct in detail – at least on paper – 
this district of the Polish capital that has 
disappeared.
A palimpsest city that writes its history on 
the pages of the past, without ever really 
erasing it, Warsaw is a vast mosaic that is 
constantly reinventing itself in time and 
space. More than stone and concrete, 
it is made up of flows of human energy 
and the currents that traverse through 
it – constructing and deconstructing its 
identity, made of rebellious memory and 
salutary oblivion.
An architect with degrees from the 
Polytechnic University, Warsaw, and 
France’s Université de Marne-la-Vallée, 
Joanna Lasserre (Poland) is involved 
in civic action in Poland and France, in 
parallel with her professional projects 
in architecture, urban planning and 
communication.
