Dai Rong and Xue Dayuan
The Dong people, a Chinese 
ethnic minority who have 
lived for thousands of years in 
Congjiang county, in the heart 
of Guizhou province, were 
ecologists before their time. 
Centuries ago, they invented 
an agricultural system that we 
would term “green” today – 
producing organic food while 
preserving the stability and 
diversity of local ecosystems. 
The “Rice-Fish-Duck” Symbiotic 
System is the direct result of 
their ancestral wisdom.
Of rice, fish, ducks and 
humans
Inhabited mainly by the Dong, the Miao, 
and thirteen other ethnic minorities, 
Congjiang county is lacking in arable 
land. Faced with a hostile environment, 
the Dong have shown genius by 
inventing an agricultural production 
system that provides economic, 
ecological, social and cultural benefits.
Relying on their ancestral practices to 
this day, they allow the ecosystem to 
recycle the flow of energy and material. 
Traditional varieties of glutinous rice have 
been preserved, and are cultivated on 
terraces where they also breed fish. When 
the fish grow to ten centimetres in size, 
ducklings are introduced to the terraced 
fields for breeding. 
Dating back to the Eastern Han dynasty 
(25 AD to 220 AD), the “Rice-Fish-Duck” 
system is based on the biological and 
ecological characteristics of the various 
organisms, where the needs of each are 
respected. This is done making full use 
of the available solar energy, water and 
mineral resources – creating a production 
structure that benefits all.
For the villagers of Congjiang county 
who live in isolation in the mountains, 
these rice fields are the main source 
of food. Over a hundred kinds of 
edible wild plants including fern, 
bamboo shoots and funghi co-exist 
with the rice varieties – as do taro, 
lotus root, water celery and plantain. 
Aquatic animals such as snail, eel, and 
loach are also eaten, providing the 
inhabitants with high-quality protein. 
The organic farming model increases 
the market value of the fish and 
ducks, which sell for twice as much as 
conventional products. 
Covering an area of approximately 
12,600 hectares, the rice shoots provide 
shade and organic food for the fish 
and ducks, who in turn, feed on pests 
and produce an excellent manure – 
thus playing a major role in weeding, 
fertilizing and oxygenating the rice 
fields. The varieties of rice, ducks and 
fish are all local and do not require any 
pesticides, because the system offers 
them excellent protection against 
diseases. This effectively preserves the 
diversity of local agricultural species 
and ecosystems, and also considerably 
reduces animal feed and labour costs.

In China’s Congjiang county, 
all hands are at work to harvest rice 
in the autumn.
A new lease of life
Nevertheless, this traditional agricultural 
system is threatened by globalization 
and the high productivity and 
efficiency of modern agriculture. The 
indiscriminate introduction of exotic 
high-yield crop varieties has caused 
the area under the system to decrease 
each year. Also, the large-scale use of 
pesticides and fertilizers over several 
decades has caused serious farmland 
and water pollution in the region, 
threatening food security. 
An increasing number of Chinese 
citizens are becoming aware of the 
shortcomings caused by modern 
agricultural production, and realizing 
the importance of healthier and better-
quality food for their societies. They have 
started advocating the use of traditional 
practices in the future development of 
agriculture. This should ideally protect 
ancient agriculture systems – ensuring 
higher incomes for farmers, and the 
protection of the environment. It would 
also help promote tourism to the region 
and the preservation of the country's 
cultural heritage. 
This new awareness is expected to 
provide a fresh lease of life for the “Rice-
Fish-Duck” system, which could serve 
as an inspiration for modern agriculture 
in China and other parts of the world 
where similar natural conditions 
prevail. It is an invaluable resource that 
could help provide solutions to the 
problems caused by agricultural and 
environmental degradation worldwide. 
Chinese specialists in the field of 
traditional knowledge of ethnic 
minorities, Dai Rong and Xue Dayuan 
have contributed to the work of 
the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services (IPBES). Dai Rong, 
an ethnoecologist from the Tujia ethnic 
minority, works at the Nanjing Institute 
of Environmental Sciences. Xue Dayuan 
is a professor at the Faculty of Life and 
Environmental Sciences of the Minzu 
University of China. 
The traditional agricultural system 
is threatened by globalization and 
the efficiency of modern agriculture

Recognizing this agro-ecosystem as 
“an extraordinary living model of 
water and soil resources”, the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO) designated it 
as a Globally Important Agricultural 
Heritage Systems (GIAHS) site in 2001. 
This outstanding example of Chinese 
alpine agriculture was included by the 
Chinese government in the first round 
of the country’s Important Agricultural 
Heritage Systems in 2013.
