Rapa Nui:
Back from the brink 
Interview by Jasmina Šopova 
and Carolina Rollan Ortega
Isolated in the middle of the 
Pacific Ocean, midway between 
the coasts of Chile and Tahiti, 
the young people of Rapa Nui 
(Easter Island) use Spanish to 
connect to the world. They 
have almost lost the use of their 
mother tongue, Rapa Nui, which 
is of Polynesian origin. Only ten 
per cent of youth master the 
language today, compared to 
seventy-six per cent forty years 
ago. María Virginia Haoa of the 
Rapa Nui Language Academy 
sounds the alarm.
Outdoor games at the traditional 
Tapati Rapa Nui festival, 
one of the largest cultural events 
in the Pacific, featuring indigenous 
music and dance.
Why is the disappearance of a language 
a problem?
Language is inseparable from our way 
of being, our thoughts, our feelings, our 
joys and much more. It is through our 
language that we show who we are. If our 
language disappears, the whole socio-
cultural foundation of our community of 
speakers is put at risk.
On Easter Island, the Rapa Nui 
language no longer has a place in the 
socio-economic development of our 
community. Discarded by public services 
and tourist activities, the Polynesian 
language is being swallowed up at 
a dizzying speed by Spanish, with 
significant negative consequences on the 
community’s values.
For example, family farming has been 
abandoned in favour of the consumption 
of national and transnational products, 
the origin and manufacturing methods of 
which are unknown. In the past, farmers 
observed the phases of the moon to 
determine when to plant their crops. 
Today, this is a lost art.

Practices such as sharing produce 
between families and neighbours – a 
traditional form of solidarity and 
interaction – have disappeared, even as 
intergenerational dialogue is dying out. 
Young people spend their time playing 
video games and on social media, 
reducing the amount of time they spend 
interacting with their elders. Sometimes it 
is the parents – who are too busy working 
to improve their material comfort – 
who neglect the most important task: 
educating their sons and daughters, 
including about their own culture.
What is the current status of Rapa Nui  
as a living language?
According to a sociolinguistic survey 
conducted in 2016 by the Ministry of 
Education of Chile (MINEDUC) and 
UNESCO, half of all Rapa Nui speakers are 
concentrated in the age group of over 40. 
In the 20- to 39-year age group, only 
about thirty-five per cent speak Rapa 
Nui. When they become parents, the vast 
majority do not transmit the vernacular 
language to their children. The daily 
language used by mixed-couple families 
(Rapa Nui and other) is generally Spanish.
It is becoming increasingly rare to find 
native-language speakers under 18. In 
1976, when the language was introduced 
as a subject in the school curriculum, 
seventy-six per cent of schoolchildren 
spoke Rapa Nui. In 1997, this fell to 
only twenty-three per cent. In 2016, 
the figure was reduced to ten per cent. 
This is an alarming figure for all of us who 
are concerned about the future of our 
language and our culture.
What have you done to preserve 
the linguistic heritage?
In 1990, we created the Department of 
Rapa Nui Language and Culture at the 
Lorenzo Baeza Vega school. With the 
support of CONADI [the indigenous 
development agency within the Ministry 
of Social Development] and the Ministry 
of Education, we – with the school’s Rapa 
Nui teachers – have produced primary 
education texts for science, history, 
mathematics, and for learning to read 
and write.
Since its inception in 2004, the Rapa 
Nui Academy has created pre-primary 
teaching materials and re-published 
reading and writing texts for the first 
two years of primary school. It has also 
produced two interactive CDs presenting 
the concepts of culture, mathematics 
and geometry.
The Academy devoted the year 2011 
to conducting a survey, with the aim of 
expanding to three other schools and 
a public kindergarten on the island. In 
2012, it participated in the evaluation 
of the law – passed in 2011 – to create 
an Indigenous Language Sector (ILS) in 
all schools attended by students of the 
indigenous peoples of Chile. 
What is the current situation of 
the language in the educational system?
When formal education was introduced 
on the island in 1934, Rapa Nui was 
not part of it. The students learned 
everything by heart, in Spanish, without 
understanding anything. It made no 
sense to them. In addition, they had to 
learn from content that was completely 
foreign to them. To take just one example, 
when we heard the phrase, “the sun rises 
in the cordillera”, we had no idea what it 
was about, because none of us had ever 
seen or heard of a mountain range.
Eight decades later, only one school, 
Lorenzo Baeza Vega, has a Rapa Nui 
immersion programme, which runs from 
pre-primary to fourth grade (ages 5 to 9). 
During its eighteen years of existence, 
this programme has had its ups and 
downs, depending on the changes in 
the number of hours allocated to the 
teaching of Rapa Nui. Because the school 
administration is obsessed with students 
scoring well on the SIMCE ( a national 
test), it has added hours of Spanish 
instruction in mathematics, language 
and physical education.

On Easter Island, 
the Rapa Nui language 
no longer has a place 
in the socio-economic 
development of 
our community
The Rapa Nui National Park, a UNESCO 
World Heritage site, is an open-air 
archaeological museum. Within it, Lake 
Rano Raruku is surrounded by moai, 
gigantic monolithic statues carved from 
the area’s volcanic stone. About 900 moai 
were carved in this exceptional quarry 
between the tenth and sixteenth centuries.

In 2017, we created the non-
governmental organization (NGO) 
Nid Rapa Nui, which takes in about 
twenty children aged 2 to 3 years. 
It is autonomous, but we receive 
support from government institutions 
to pay teachers and to improve our 
infrastructure. In 2018, we also received 
support from the Ma’u Henua Polynesian 
indigenous community, which helped 
pay teachers’ salaries. This association 
was founded in July 2016 with the aim 
of establishing a new management 
system for the Rapa Nui National Park, a 
UNESCO World Heritage site.
We are developing a teaching 
programme for the Nid Rapa Nui, which 
incorporates philosophical guidelines 
specific to the local culture, since the 
NGO’s objective is to start a school where 
courses will be taught entirely in the 
vernacular language.
Are there enough people capable 
of teaching in Rapa Nui?
No. We have enlisted several community 
leaders and employed traditional 
teachers. All of them bring the know-
how acquired within their families – 
and it is precious. But they need to be 
trained in planning and methodology, 
to improve the teaching of the Rapa Nui 
cultural content. 
To remedy the shortage of teachers, 
I believe that young people should be 
motivated to study to become teachers. 
This could be done by increasing the 
number of scholarships to encourage 
them to enroll in universities such as 
Waikato, in Aotearoa (New Zealand), 
or in Hilo, Hawaii, in the United States, 
which have extensive experience in 
teaching Polynesian languages.
Finally, we hope to convince a Chilean 
university to take on the training of 
Rapa Nui teachers remotely, through 
online courses.
Co-founder of the Rapa Nui Academy 
that she headed from 2004 to 2010, 
María Virginia Haoa is president of the 
NGO Nid Rapa Nui. She was awarded the 
Chilean government’s Gabriela Mistral 
Order of Merit in 2004 for her efforts to 
revitalize Rapa Nui. Haoa also goes by the 
name of Viki Haoa Cardinali.
