The priorities
With an average growth rate of more 
than seven per cent per year since 2000, 
Rwanda is now one of the leading African 
countries in economic growth. According 
to official figures, its investments in 
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, mining 
and tourism have lifted more than one 
million people out of poverty. 
This development is accompanied by 
the country’s increased integration 
into regional economic structures, 
but also by its greater participation 
in the international community. With 
6,550 personnel, Rwanda is now the 
fourth-largest contributor to United 
Nations peacekeeping operations. 
But the country wants to invest first and 
foremost in people to achieve all-inclusive 
development. That is why it places 
women at the forefront of public life. 
They paid a high price during the black 
spring in Rwanda: between 100,000 and 
250,000 women were victims of rape and 
sexual assault, these appalling weapons 
of war, recognized by the ICTR as acts 
of genocide. Since then, many of them 
have died of AIDS contracted during 
the attacks. 
In order to ensure women’s protection, a 
Law on the Prevention and Punishment 
of Gender-based Violence was adopted 
in 2008. Other laws ensure their full 
participation in political and social life: 
at least thirty per cent of positions are 
reserved for women in all state bodies 
at all levels. This strategy has bridged 
the gap between men and women at 
a faster rate. Today, sixty-two per cent 
of parliamentarians, fifty per cent of 
ministers and forty-four per cent of 
officials in the judiciary are women. 
Education and health are two other 
priority sectors, which have absorbed 
thirty per cent of the annual national 
budget for several years. The rate of 
school attendance in the twelve years 
of compulsory education is ninety per 
cent and health insurance coverage is 
eighty-seven per cent. 
Twenty-five years ago, the bloodiest 
chapter in the contemporary history 
of Africa was written in Rwanda. In a 
hundred days, a million people lost their 
lives, leaving behind a million orphans, 
not counting the widows and widowers. 
I was in Uganda when this drama was 
being played out in my country. The 
neighbour to the north had welcomed 
me as a refugee in 1962, when I was 
a young man of 17. I studied there, at 
Makerere University, started my family 
and lived there until 2008. But since 1994, 
I have divided my time between Uganda 
and Rwanda, to take care of my family’s 
orphans and also to contribute to the 
reconstruction of my homeland. 
Everything had to be redone in this 
wounded country. The first concern 
of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, RPF-
Inkotanyi, the political party led at the 
time by the current Rwandan President 
Paul Kagame, was to stop the genocide 
and restore peace and security. “We have 
learned lessons that should inform us 
how to build our future,” he recently told a 
gathering of business leaders in Charlotte, 
North Carolina, in the United States. 
To build the future, we began by 
relearning to conjugate the verb “to be” in 
the plural and to tell ourselves that we are 
all Banyarwanda. Forget who is Tutsi, who 
is Hutu, who is Twa. Overcome hatred.
The Rwandan 
miracleAlphonse Nkusi
A quarter of a century after 
the terrible genocide of 1994, 
Rwanda is turning a new page 
in its history. Following a long 
period of national unification 
and reconciliation, it is investing 
in economic growth and 
focusing on new technologies, 
with the hope of becoming an 
ICT hub in Africa. 
With this article, the Courier participates 
in the International Day of Reflection 
on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi 
in Rwanda, on 7 April.
Tradition to the rescue
Priority was given to unity and 
reconciliation. To this end, the gacaca, 
the traditional system of justice, was 
revived, allowing the community to try 
the perpetrators and accept their request 
for forgiveness. Through these traditional 
courts, survivors were able to learn more 
about the deaths of their relatives, but 
also about the criminals who confessed 
their actions and admitted their guilt. 
Different sentences were handed down, 
depending on the seriousness of the 
crimes committed. Some were sentenced 
to community service, others to prison 
terms. In ten years, the gacaca courts 
judged 1.9 million cases, before they were 
officially closed in May 2012. 
At the same time, public judicial 
institutions were rehabilitated in 
order to judge the most serious cases. 
Internationally, the International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), established 
on 8 November 1994, recognized that 
“genocide, crimes against humanity and 
war crimes were perpetrated on a horrific 
scale”, reaching “a rate of killing four times 
greater than at the height of the Nazi 
Holocaust”. To date, the ICTR has indicted 
ninety-three individuals, considered 
to be planners and perpetrators of the 
genocide. Eighty of them have been tried, 
out of which twenty-three have served 
their sentences.
In the aftermath of the genocide, another 
traditional method was used to enable 
citizens to participate in public affairs. 
It consists of a commitment to planned 
activities in a management system that 
provides for contracts called imihigo. In 
the past they were oral and endorsed by 
a ceremony, today they are written and 
signed, but their function remains the 
same: they engage the individual to carry 
out a number of tasks during a year, at 
the end of which their performance is 
evaluated by the community. 
This method has contributed significantly 
to the improvement of public services 
in present-day Rwanda, which has 
opted for consensual democracy and 
power-sharing. 

Health services have improved 
considerably in remote areas since the 
arrival of Zipline drones, which, according 
to the chief executive officer of the 
American startup, made more than 
4,000 deliveries of blood and medicine 
between October 2016 and April 2018. 
Education, too, is slowly but surely 
changing as a result of new information 
and communication technologies (ICTs), 
particularly since the launch of the 
“One laptop per child” initiative in June 
2008. Over 600,000 laptops have been 
distributed and pupils have adopted to 
share their usage on a daily basis. The 
project, however, has faced challenges, 
notably lack of electricity coverage in 
rural areas for charging the laptops 
and a lack of resources to distribute 
them to over 2.3 million schoolchildren. 
Nevertheless, ICTs are developing at full 
speed: 4,000 kilometres of fibre-optic 
cables have already been rolled out in 
the country, which has a surface area 
just exceeding 26,000 square kilometres. 
This year it is expected that wireless 
internet and fibre-optic will cover 
ninety-five per cent of the country.
The vast majority of the population 
already has access to mobile phones and 
out of roughly 13 million inhabitants, 
more than 4 million can now shop and 
pay their bills, taxes, and even police 
fines, using mobile applications. The same 
applies to administrative procedures. 
Simply go to the portal Irembo (the word 
means access in Kinyarwanda) to find 
most government services online.
Looking to the future
Rwanda is focusing on technology 
development to ensure a better future. 
Banking transactions are facilitated 
through mobile services. Business leaders 
have access to e-commerce through 
the Electronic World Trade Platform 
(eWRP), launched in October 2018 by 
China’s e-commerce giant Alibaba. 
Urban transport is facilitated by car 
and motorcycle services controlled via 
mobile applications. 
Among the latter, SafeMotos, nicknamed 
“the Uber of motorcycle taxis” was born 
at kLab, a technology innovation hub 
considered to be the most dynamic 
in the country. Since 2012, it has 
trained thousands of young people 
free of charge, helping to launch 
sixty companies, four of which have 
become leaders in their field of activity 
and two of which have expanded 
internationally. It is one of a number of 
innovation centres that have developed, 
particularly in Kigali, the capital, with a 
view to offering young Rwandans new 
professional opportunities. 
The City of Innovation to be built as 
part of Africa50, the infrastructure 
development platform of the African 
Development Bank (AfDB), also promises 
a bright technological future for Rwanda, 
which is now well positioned to become 
a regional ICT platform. Especially since 
in September 2018, artificial intelligence 
(AI) officially entered the university 
curriculum, thanks to a master’s degree 
launched by the Senegalese expert 
Moustapha Cissé, head of Google’s AI 
research centre in Ghana, and by the 
African Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
(AIMS) in Kigali.
A quarter of a century after the genocide 
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, the divided, 
devastated, dilapidated nation, in need 
of reconstruction and rehabilitation, is 
today resolutely looking to the future and 
preparing the ground for what may one 
day be called the Rwandan miracle. 
Alphonse Nkusi (Rwanda) has held 
posts including senior media analyst at 
the Rwanda Governance Council, editor 
of New Vision, one of Uganda’s two 
leading daily newspapers, and lecturer 
in social communication at Makerere 
University, Uganda.

Celestial Eye, a brooch from the Ibaba 
series by French designer Céleste Mogador, 
created in the Ibaba Rwanda embroidery 
workshop in rural Rwanda, where women 
have finally returned to work after 
an interruption of nineteen years. 
