After losing his home 
to the river for the fourth 
time, Montu Shadhu 
was forced to find refuge 
on his brother’s land. 

In the land of 
wild rivers
Photos: Protick Sarker
Text: Katerina Markelova
With this photo-reportage, 
the Courier marks World Water Day, 
celebrated on 22 March.
Bangladeshi photographer Protick Sarker 
was still a high school student in the 2000s 
when he discovered the novel Padma 
River Boatman by Manik Bandopadhyaya 
– a classic of twentieth-century Bengali 
literature. The very special relationship 
between people and water – bringing 
both prosperity and destruction – 
depicted in the book, is familiar to him. 
Born in the land of wild rivers, Sarker, like 
his 162 million fellow citizens, lives to the 
rhythm of the monsoons – which inundate 
a third of the country every year, between 
May and September. 
These floods have devastating effects, 
both on the land and the people, as 
does the river erosion, which causes 
the loss of between 1,500 hectares and 
3,500 hectares of arable land each year*. 
But it is these same floods that make 
the fields of the Bengal Delta, which 
Bangladesh shares with India, so fertile. 
Father and son on one of the ephemeral islands, 
where the abundance of grass makes it conducive to dairy farming. 
*In 2017, some 950,000 people were displaced due 
to extreme weather events, according to the Internal 
Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC).

Composed of sediments carried by 
Bangladesh’s 230 rivers, these well- 
aerated and irrigated lands attract farmers 
to settle along the riverbanks in spite of 
the risk. “The king in the morning becomes 
a beggar in the evening,” sing the peasants 
who have lost everything, and yet return 
to the riverside to rebuild their lives.
The incredible ability of his people to 
live on these lands that are built and 
destroyed by the floods, had fascinated 
Sarker as a young student. Becoming a 
professional photographer a few years 
later, he set out on a journey along the 
majestic Padma river, starting from the 
border between Bangladesh and India, 
where India’s Ganges surges into the 
Bangladeshi river. 
And then, as the day of 3 November 2011 
was coming to an end, he witnessed the 
abrupt collapse of a stretch of riverbank, 
engulfed by the waters. “Suddenly I saw 
the river erosion which I had read about 
at school, happening brutally before 
my very eyes,” said Sarker. The event 
occurred in the Ishwardi upazila (district 
subdivision). “Seeing these people lose 
their homes, their land, everything… and 
at the same time seeing them remain 
strong and optimistic, and still going 
on with their lives, touched me deeply.” 
The man from Dhaka kept returning to 
the area for seven years to complete 
his photographic series, Of River and 
Lost Lands.
“It is the story of the places that have 
disappeared, which have been taken by 
the river. I wanted the images to convey 
a certain melancholy, a sense of loss,” 
says Sarker, who photographed Ishwardi 
only under foggy monsoon skies. “The 
series shows how vulnerable we human 
beings are to nature. But it also shows 
the cycle of the perpetual renewal of life, 
which I was keen to explore in my work.” 
Ephemeral islands, called chars, emerge 
from the waters after each monsoon 
and welcome thousands of people left 
without land**.
The adversity of the elements, to which 
humans seem to have adjusted as best 
they can, is worsening day by day due to 
climate change.  

Bangladesh, which is predominantly flat 
and low-lying, is particularly exposed 
to rising sea levels. The multiplication 
and intensification of extreme weather 
events and the increasing melting of the 
Himalayan glaciers, where the rivers of 
the delta originate, make the nation one 
of the world’s most vulnerable.
The fragile balance that can be observed 
in Sarker’s photographs is being severely 
put to the test. 
**According to the French magazine Hommes & 
migrations, five million people were living on these 
ephemeral islands in 2010.
Young Brishty finds herself alone, after her family was forced to relocate because of river erosion.
Shom Nath Kumar has permanently left his village after losing everything to the river. 
Fishing is one of the main sources of 
subsistence for the villagers.

Remaining landless, this family arrives from the mainland to settle on a river tank, 
or island that emerged from the water after the monsoon.
Ephemeral islands, or river tanks, attract farmers in spite of their unpredictability. 

Rahima and her family 
do not live on an ephemeral 
island, but they cultivate 
peanuts there. 

Two men advance cautiously along a river bank that has collapsed. 
Returning home from school.

Two men advance cautiously along a river bank that has collapsed. 
Returning home from school.
The hand of a boat-builder.
