Under the auspices of UNESCO
The conflict in Syria has caused heavy loss 
of life and extensive damage to cities and 
infrastructure, devastating the economic 
and social life of the Syrian people and 
their cultural heritage. Once hailed as 
an example of best practice in urban 
conservation, the Ancient City of Aleppo, 
inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage 
List in 1986, was added to the List of 
World Heritage in Danger in 2013. Heavily 
affected by the conflict, the city has been 
reduced to ruins in many places.
Over 500 damaged properties – from the 
Citadel of Aleppo to markets, museums, 
places of worship, and other historical 
buildings – have recently been identified 
in a study* conducted by UNESCO and 
the United Nations Institute for Training 
and Research (UNITAR).
Aleppo:  A first step 
towards healing
This is the first comprehensive inventory 
of the material damage and memory 
loss suffered by this ancient city 
between 2013 and 2017. The capital 
of the Amorite kingdom of Yamhad, 
Aleppo experienced a tremendous 
boom at the beginning of 2000 BC. 
It was considered the seat of the storm 
god, Halab, according to the authors of 
the book, Ruba Kasmo, a Syrian architect 
from Aleppo, and Jean-Claude David, 
a French geographer. 
Twenty cultural heritage experts, 
historians, archaeologists, architects and 
satellite imagery analysts participated 
in this project, which began as soon 
as the shelling of the city stopped in 
December 2016.

Challenge of mass, Aleppo, 
Syria 2013, from the collection of 
Cartooning for Peace, the international 
network of editorial cartoonists, 
supported by UNESCO. 

Illustrated with photos of the city and its 
buildings before and after the conflict 
began, and providing QR codes with 
which to access satellite images and 3D 
documentation, the study offers a solid 
technical basis for the planning of the 
restoration and rehabilitation of Aleppo. 
It reveals that more than ten per cent of 
Aleppo’s historic buildings have been 
destroyed and that more than half the 
buildings assessed showed moderate to 
severe damage.
But it is not just the stones that have been 
destroyed. The soul of the city has been 
shattered. The restoration of memory is as, 
if not more, important, than reconstructing 
buildings. The Great Mosque of Aleppo, for 
example, was a jewel of Seljuk civilization. 
It was unique not only for its minaret and 
exceptional decoration, but also for its 
social role. This place of worship has been 
a fundamental element of Syrian culture, 
with generations of Syrians gathering here 
over the course of nine hundred years. Its 
devastation strikes at the very essence of 
this community.
The inhabitants of Aleppo are the 
custodians of the history and memory of 
their city. It will be up to them to revive 
its cultural, social and economic life. The 
authors have dedicated this book to them, 
to help them overcome the trauma of war. 
Chantal Connaughton, British writer, 
editor and communications specialist.
* Five Years of Conflict: The State of Cultural Heritage in 
the Ancient City of Aleppo, published by UNESCO and 
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research 
(UNITAR). The study was conducted in partnership 
with the Syrian government’s Directorate-General 
for Antiquities and Museums (DGAM) and EAMENA 
(Endangered Archaeology in the Middle East & North 
Africa), based in the United Kingdom. It was funded 
by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
the UNESCO Heritage Emergency Fund. 143 pages, 
December 2018.
It is not just 
the stones that 
have been 
destroyed. 
The soul of the 
city has been 
shattered 
