Arab youth, 
architects of their future
Photos: Yan Bighetti de Flogny (Al Safar Project) / MiSK Art Institute
Text: Katerina Markelova

almost 120,000 kilometres and visit all 
the Muslim countries. In the course of this 
great journey, comparable only to that of 
Marco Polo, he visited Mecca four times, 
became a judge in Delhi and in the Maldive 
Islands, accompanied a Greek princess to 
Constantinople, sailed to Sumatra and Java, 
and journeyed to China as ambassador 
of the Sultan of India. Then, in 1349, he 
returned briefly to his own country (“the 
best land in the world”) before setting off 
immediately to the kingdom of Granada 
and after that on a journey through Africa to 
the Niger basin. The diary which Ibn Battuta 
dictated to a scribe during his travels is a 
source of the first importance for the history 
of the Muslim world of his time, especially 
for the history of India, Asia Minor and West 
Africa.”
The story inspired our photographer, whose 
reporting project on the fight against 
cultural prejudices had been maturing for 
years, but lacked a common thread. Which 
he had now found: Yan decided that he 
would embark on a long journey, in the 
footsteps of Ibn Battuta! The project was 
launched in March 2018. It will take three 
The old and the new,  
Beirut, Lebanon, 2018. 
French photographer Yan Bighetti de 
Flogny was in Pakistan when, in the course 
of a conversation with a hotel owner, he 
learned of the existence of Ibn Battuta, the 
fourteenth-century Moroccan explorer. 
Unfairly little-known, Ibn Battuta is “perhaps 
the greatest traveller who has ever lived”, 
as an article in the Courier of  August-
September 1981 tells us. 
“At the age of 21, he started his travels 
by undertaking a pilgrimage to Mecca. 
This was the start of thirty years of 
wandering, during which he would travel 

Football game in the heart of  the historic city of Jeddah,  
Saudi Arabia (2019), inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List. 

years and cover more than twenty countries, 
from Morocco to China, following a similar 
itinerary to the one undertaken by the 
Moroccan explorer seven centuries earlier.
Yan and his team are currently halfway 
through, trying to “restore some accuracy 
and a little bit of colour to this Muslim world, 
wrongly disparaged in the West”. Every time 
he comes home, he is disturbed by the gap 
between the way the people around him 
look at this unknown world and the reality 
he witnesses during his travels: “the warmth, 
the hospitality, the deep generosity, and 
especially the people, who have the same 
dreams and the same sorrows that we have.”
The ardour of youth
Arab youth, with their unwavering 
determination to choose their own destiny, 
have emerged as one of the pillars of 
the project. It is to them that the Courier 
dedicates this photo reportage,  published 
on the occasion of International Youth Day, 
12 August.
The desire to live and to change their lives is 
what unites young people from the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA). “Wherever 
you are, you really feel a common energy. I 
found a lot of similarities in their way of life, 
in their vision of the future,” explains Yan. 
“Sometimes I think it’s the elders who have 
remained stuck on certain disagreements 
that young people only want to forget.”
Faced with the highest youth 
unemployment rate in the world, forty-nine 
per cent for women and twenty-seven per 
cent  for men, the region’s youth are not 
giving up. “I didn’t sense any negativity or 
lack of hope,” says the photographer. “The 
problem of unemployment is worrying, 
but many of the other challenges facing 
the region until twenty years ago – such 
as access to education, clean water and 
sanitation – are less prevalent today.”   
According to the World Bank, two out of 
three people in the MENA region are under 
the age of 24. The demographic weight 
of Arab youth makes them a living force 
and gives them a central place in the Arab 
societies of tomorrow. “The spark has been 
ignited,” says Jan. “They won’t give up, they 
know what they want, and in my opinion, 
they have taken the right path to get there.”
Jana, 16, a champion climber, often scales the high rocks of Wadi Rum, Jordan, 2018. 
The protected area is on the UNESCO World Heritage List. 
Sunset over the Hassan II Mosque 
in Casablanca, Morocco, 2018.  
In the foreground are dancers of 
the Lhiba Kingzoo hip-hop group, 
founded in the city in 2005. 
Produced by the international cultural 
platform Al Safar (“voyage” in Arabic), the 
project In the footsteps of Ibn Battuta is 
in progress in partnership with UNESCO, 
the French digital edition of National 
Geographic and MiSK Art Institute.  
Discover it on the website  
www.alsafarproject.org


An afternoon at the beach,  
Aqaba, Jordan, 2018.
A play of reflections at the El Mechouar palace, 
Tlemcen, Algeria, 2018, dating from the Middle Ages. 

The graffiti artist Ed One in action, Casablanca, 2018. The Moroccan city’s former slaughter-houses 
have now been converted into a cultural space dedicated to urban and contemporary arts.
Three young women captured in a suspended moment amidst the perpetual goings  
and comings of trams in Alexandria, Egypt, 2019. 

A peaceful evening on the corniche, Tripoli, Lebanon, 2018. An admirer of the great Orientalist paintings, 
the photographer composes his shots on several levels. The first view from a distance allows the staging 
and colours to be observed. Then, as the viewer gets closer, more details can be examined.    
Rochdi Belgasmi under the  Republic Bridge in Tunis, Tunisia, 2018. 
This young dancer, whose notoriety continues to grow, 
has had to fight to have his innovative vision of dance recognized. 
