Asphalt also absorbs a large part of the 
sun’s rays, which it converts into a heat 
flux – thus contributing to warming the 
local environment. Concrete, on the 
other hand, consumes a lot of energy 
during its production, contributing 
to global warming through carbon 
emissions. In addition, modern urban 
planning does not favour public 
transportation. This makes private cars 
a necessity, creating more pollution and 
localized heat islands, especially when 
combined with the air-conditioning 
systems of buildings. 
Architectural
lessons 
for the future, via the past 
Amin Al-Habaibeh
Modern cities, with their paved 
roads and glass towers, are 
hardly adapted to cope with the 
expected rise in temperatures. 
Designed to provide shade 
and air circulation, traditional 
buildings in the Middle East, 
Gulf and African countries 
could inspire more sustainable 
and environmentally-friendly 
habitats in other parts of 
the world. 
As a result of global warming and the 
rise in greenhouse gas levels, cities 
across the world are increasingly likely 
to be exposed to extreme temperatures. 
This is particularly true in the Gulf 
countries, where temperatures are 
expected to rise to over 50 °C during 
the twenty-first century. But these heat 
surges have not spared other regions of 
the world – particularly Europe, where 
during the summer of 2019, record 
temperatures were reached in France, 
the United Kingdom and Switzerland, 
among other countries. 
Today, lifestyles and architecture are 
dependent on air conditioning, and 
modern materials such as concrete, 
asphalt or glass. These materials, 
however, are not adapted to high 
temperatures. Glass reflects solar 
radiation to the surrounding area, 
creating heat islands and the risk of 
a greenhouse effect inside buildings. 
Historically, before the adoption of the 
modern way of life, most people on 
the planet lived in a more harmonious 
way with their environment. They were 
either farmers within oases, agricultural 
or fishing village communities, Bedouins 
or nomads living in tents in the desert, 
or urban dwellers living in cities. 
The materials they selected to build 
their dwellings came from the 
environment. They were sustainable, 
adapted to their way of life, and based 
on what is now termed a circular 
economy. Due to their travelling 
lifestyles and animal herding, the 
Bedouins lived in tents that were 
optimized for protection against the 
weather, and for flexibility.  
A typical Andalusian patio in Cordoba, 
Spain.

The tents were designed and built to 
function effectively with the environment 
– they were woven using available 
resources like goat hair and sheep’s wool. 
This is why they are called “houses of hair” 
in Arabic. 
Environmentally-
friendly materials
The tent’s material allows the air to 
circulate. The fibres become swollen 
and waterproof when wet, which is ideal 
during the rainy weather. In the hot and 
dry weather, the Bedouins would wet the 
tent and its surrounding area, and also 
humidify additional pieces of cloth and 
rugs to reduce temperatures by water 
evaporation. The tent’s high insulation 
capabilities allow for cool conditions 
in the summer, and warmth in the 
winter, created with a small fire. Nothing 
prevents us from using similar materials 
to create modern architecture, to make 
temperatures more bearable.
The buildings of the past, on the other 
hand, were designed with very thick 
walls, using natural and environmentally-
friendly materials such as limestone and 
natural mud, mixed with local desert 
plants in some cases. This provided a 
construction material with a high thermal 
capacity to regulate the temperature 
of the buildings. The material had the 
advantage of being able to absorb 
humidity during the night-time, which 
would evaporate during the hot and 
sunny days, to provide the required 
cooling effect. This effect is evident at 
the Red Palace in Al-Jahra, Kuwait – an 
excellent example of the architecture and 
building technology that once existed in 
the Gulf region. 
Glass was not a common building 
material in the past. Some rooms had 
only two windows. The first was a small 
skylight, placed very high, and kept open 
for air circulation and natural light, while 
maintaining privacy. A second larger 
window was usually kept closed, with 
wooden shutters allowing a flow of air 
into the room, while protecting privacy. 
The mashrabiyya, a projecting window 
with carved wooden latticework, usually 
located on the top storeys of buildings, 
ensures better air circulation and protects 
against direct exposure to the sun. 
In warm climates, cities and buildings 
were designed to optimize shade, reduce 
the direct or indirect thermal gain of sun 
radiation, regulate building temperatures 
and enhance air circulation for cooling. 
The streets were paved with natural 
stones, or simply left covered with sand. 
That meant they reacted much better to 
high temperatures without storing heat, 
as is the case with the asphalt used today. 
With the narrow roads and alleyways, 
and buildings built adjacent to each 
other, the ratio of the area exposed to 
the sun relative to the total volume of the 
buildings was reduced to a minimum – as 
was the heat gain during the day.
Opting for shade 
and air 
Buildings were designed with internal 
courtyards surrounded by rooms or 
walls – in most cases, from all sides. This 
created a large area for social activities in 
the late afternoons and at night, due to 
the maximization of shade provided by 
the surrounding rooms. In most cases, 
the central courtyard contained trees 
and a fountain or a well, which could also 
be used to collect rainwater. At midday, 
the courtyard functioned as a chimney 
for the hot air to rise and be replaced 
by cooler air from the surrounding 
rooms, improving air circulation and 
the cooling effect. 
This type of architecture was very 
common in Damascus, Syria, and in 
Andalusia, Spain. The narrow streets 
could be covered with lightweight 
materials from date palms. This 
improved air circulation between 
the streets and courtyards of the 
buildings, via the rooms. The texture 
and the sandy colour of the walls 
limited the absorption and emission 
of the radiating heat. 
In Jordan, the Nabatean 
people took this symbiosis 
with nature even further, 
by using the thermal inertia 
of the ground
Built in 2011, the Sewing School 
Steel-Earth in Niamey, Niger, combines 
know-how and local materials with 
contemporary technological advances. 
The durability of the structure, which uses 
materials including banco, a mixture of 
soil and straw with good thermal inertia, 
is ensured by a double metal roof.

This was a common feature of buildings 
in many regions of the Middle East, 
including Egypt, the Hejaz region in Saudi 
Arabia, and Iraq – where the windows are 
known as roshan or shanasheel.  
Some buildings in the Gulf had a wind 
tower to create natural ventilation, where 
it was possible to open and close doors 
in the ceiling, depending on the wind 
direction – performing a similar function 
to that of modern air-cooling systems. 
Other building design characteristics 
were high structures and cloisters, 
to maximize shade and enhance air 
circulation. They were often used with 
domes, to increase the air volume 
internally, and decrease external 
thermal gain. The idea was to create 
a thermal differential that caused 
a cooling breeze, regardless of the 
actual wind speed. Symbiosis with nature
In Africa, mud huts are still being built 
today. With a sustainable and simple 
design made from clay and thatch, the 
huts not only provide passive cooling, 
but are also quick to build, affordable, 
and recyclable. The same is true of the 
traditional reed houses made by the 
Madan people, or Marsh Arabs, in the 
swamps of southern Iraq – their unique 
design and structure provide protection 
with enhanced air circulation. 
In Petra, Jordan, the Nabatean people 
took this symbiosis with nature even 
further, by using the thermal inertia of 
the ground. They created an ingeniously 
planned city, with innovative dwellings 
and an efficient rainwater harvesting 
system. The original inhabitants took 
advantage of the natural mountains 
in the area, carving out their dwellings 
in the mountainside. This ensured 
well-regulated temperatures in both 
the summer and the winter – unlike in 
modern buildings, where temperatures 
fluctuate with the season. 
Similar structures and concepts using 
the ground’s thermal inertia can also 
be found in Cappadocia, Turkey; the 
cliff dwellings of the Sinagua Indians 
at Montezuma Castle in Arizona, and 
the cavates, or man-made caves, and 
pathways carved from soft tuff rock at 
Tsankawi, New Mexico – both in the US.
A troglodyte house in Matmata, 
southern Tunisia.

One of the most fascinating historic 
architectural designs, the underground 
troglodyte dwellings, can be found in the 
Berber village of Matmata, in southern 
Tunisia. Built by digging a large pit in 
the ground, usually on a hilly site, caves, 
which serve as rooms, are carved out 
from the central pit, which becomes a 
central courtyard. This design ensures 
excellent thermal insulation. One of the 
Matmata dwellings, now converted into a 
hotel, featured in the 1977 film, Star Wars: 
Episode IV - A New Hope, as the home of 
Luke Skywalker on the fictional desert 
planet, Tatooine. 
Adapting their lifestyles was yet another 
way that people dealt with extreme 
weather conditions in the past. The 
working day began just before dawn, and 
people sought refuge from the midday 
sun until the late afternoon – when they 
resumed their business and socializing in 
cooler temperatures. This culture is still 
practised in the Middle East and Spain, 
where a siesta is observed. Drinking water 
is stored in clay jars or water bags made 
of animal skin, and kept in the shade. 
The evaporation process creates a cooling 
effect for both the stored water and 
the surroundings. 
People dressed in clothes made from 
natural materials – the loose-fitting styles 
were designed to enhance cooling and 
air circulation, while covering most of the 
body to prevent sunburn. The heads and 
faces of both men and women were most 
often protected by scarves – designed 
to reduce water loss through breathing, 
filter dust, protect from sunstroke and 
prevent aging of the skin. This versatile 
fabric is known by different names, 
depending on gender, region and design 
– in all cases, it serves as an important 
device for health protection. 
Modern solutions from 
traditional concepts
In Europe, people have used wine 
cellars to preserve wine at a specific 
range of temperatures, using the 
thermal inertia of the ground. This 
concept could be enhanced to provide 
regulated temperature in both hot and 
cold weather. Incorporating traditional 
designs into modern architecture may 
be yet another solution for tackling 
climate change. The use of traditional 
architecture has worked well for some 
modern buildings in Seville, Spain, for 
example. A water fountain in the middle 
of a courtyard surrounded by trees and 
the building structure, works well to 
reduce the temperature. 
Masdar City, a planned urban project in 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, has 
sought to combine lessons from the past 
with modern technologies – with the use 
of mashrabiyya windows, narrow streets 
and traditional colours. 
Other Gulf countries are also working to 
design sustainable eco-buildings. With 
ongoing research and the improvement 
of building and pavement materials, 
building design and urban planning, 
insulation and the use of renewable 
energy, cities in the Gulf and other 
countries with high temperatures are able 
to maintain their comfortable lifestyles – 
with considerably lower levels of carbon 
emissions and fossil fuel use.
In Europe, where temperatures are 
expected to fluctuate between extreme 
heat and cold in the future, a good start 
would be to increase the thickness of 
building walls by adding insulation and 
natural materials. This would reduce 
the need for heating in winter, and air 
conditioning in the summer. 
Fortunately, the rise in temperatures 
also allows for an increase in renewable 
solar energy. In most homes, the use of 
photovoltaic solar energy combined with 
better insulation could provide the power 
needed to run air-conditioning systems. 
But this would create heat islands on 
the roads – particularly those made of 
asphalt, as is currently the case. Planting 
more trees would help to regulate 
temperatures in these conditions, and 
provide a cooler environment.

The use of insulation would also reduce 
air-conditioning loads and electricity 
consumption. Natural or innovative 
new materials that absorb moisture and 
increase thermal capacity could regulate 
heat gain and aid the natural cooling 
process. Intelligent urban planning that 
simulates old cities could make the use 
of clean public transportation a more 
feasible option. Since the temperature 
of sea-water is more stable than that of 
air, replacing existing air-conditioning 
systems with large-scale cooling and 
heating systems at the district level 
could provide a sustainable alternative. 
The same technology could also be 
applied to river water and water from 
flooded coal mines. 
There are many lessons to be learned 
from traditional buildings around the 
world. These lessons will help us to 
appreciate our global heritage – while 
aiding us to transfer some of this 
knowledge to the design of future 
buildings and urban developments. 
Over centuries, people have designed 
buildings to be sustainable in terms 
of heating and cooling requirements, 
using ingenious techniques and 
sustainable materials sourced from the 
local environment. If we want to reduce 
global warming for future generations, 
we must integrate these lessons with 
our modern technologies to create 
sustainable and zero-carbon cities.
 
Professor of Intelligent Engineering 
Systems at the School of Architecture, 
Design and the Built Environment, 
Nottingham Trent University in the 
United Kingdom, Amin Al-Habaibeh 
(United Kingdom) also heads the 
university’s Innovative and Sustainable 
Built Environment Technologies (iSBET) 
research group.
Over centuries, people have designed 
buildings to be sustainable in terms 
of heating and cooling requirements, 
using ingenious techniques and 
sustainable materials sourced from 
the local environment
Construction of a modernized wind tower, by global architectural firm Foster + Partners, 
at the Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, in Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, in the 
United Arab Emirates. This forty-five-metre-high structure made of recycled steel, 
is equipped with atomisers, which reduce air draughts to promote freshness. 
