The world’s freshwater environment is 
facing unprecedented pressures in the 
twenty-first century. A growing global 
population and economic development 
have led to increasing demands on 
water resources. The overuse of water 
is widespread; consequences include 
reducing river flows, the loss of lakes and 
wetlands and falling ground-water levels. 
The most dramatic example of this is the 
loss of the Aral Sea in Central Asia, which 
used to be the fourth-largest saltwater 
lake in the world, but has become a 
desert in forty years, shrinking to barely 
ten per cent of its original size due to 
upstream water withdrawals. 
More generally, human impacts on 
natural systems are so extensive that the 
term Anthropocene has been used to 
describe the current geological epoch 
[see Welcome to the Anthropocene, 
Courier, April-June 2018]. The increasing 
pressures on water resources are set 
against this backdrop of extensive 
anthropogenic change. 
Urbanization (more than half of the 
world’s population now lives in cities), 
deforestation and the extension of 
cultivated land (1.5 billion hectares 
worldwide) have had a significant impact 
on hydrology and water quality. 



Delivering water
security in a changing world
Howard S. Wheater
Eighty per cent of the world’s population is exposed to high levels 
of threats to water security and a severe water crisis is looming by 
2070. Faced with these alarming estimates, the author argues that 
a business-as-usual attitude will not work. Water management is 
a scientific issue, but it is also a matter of politics, governance and 
societal values. A new transdisciplinary science is urgently needed. 
With this article, the Courier marks 
the celebration of World Water Day 
on 22 March. 
Work from the series Find a way or 
make one, by the Swiss-Russian 
photographer Anastasia Mityukova, 
made using only materials 
she could find at home:  
old photos, webcams, books, 
newspapers and ice.
Threats on a global 
scale
Nearly eighty per cent of the world’s 
population is exposed to high levels of 
water security threats. Urban areas and 
agriculture are important sources of 
water pollution, threatening aquatic life 
and increasing pressures on freshwater 
ecosystems. In 2010, experts estimated 
that 10,000 to 20,000 freshwater species 
were extinct or at risk.
Inevitably, pressures on the hydrological 
environment to meet the food and 
energy needs of a growing global human 
population will only increase. Food 
production will have to rise by seventy 
per cent by 2050 to meet projected 
demand, according to a 2012 estimate of 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO). 
A 2013 study on water scarcity published 
in the Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 
(HESS) monthly concluded that about half 
of the world’s population will experience 
severe water stress between 2071 and 
2100.
The changes wrought by human actions 
to the environment have also increased 
water-related risks to life, property 
and infrastructure associated with 
extreme events. This was illustrated by 
the 2017 flooding of Houston, Texas, in 
the United States. 

In an area where development had 
proceeded in spite of known flood risk, 
300,000 structures were inundated, 
causing the evacuation of hundreds of 
thousands of people, with flood damage 
estimated to exceed $125 billion.
In an increasingly interconnected world, 
the impact of floods and droughts is not 
limited to local consequences. The 2011 
flooding in Thailand caused economic 
losses estimated at $46.5 billion by the 
World Bank, due to the disruption of 
global electronics supply chains. And 
the heat wave in Russia in 2010, which 
affected wheat production and global 
food prices, was said to be a factor in the 
social unrest associated with the Arab 
Spring, The Economist reported in 2012.
Recent global warming has led to 
profound changes in the hydrological 
environment. The glaciers in the Canadian 
Rocky Mountains, for example, are rapidly 
retreating. They are expected to be 
largely lost by the end of the century – yet 
they feed major rivers draining into the 
Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic oceans.

The engagement of all 
stakeholders is a necessity, 
not an option 
The forests in western Canada are also 
receding, largely because they have 
been infested by bark beetles, whose 
proliferation is associated, in part, 
with warmer winters. While Western 
Canada is a regional example, it is worth 
noting that half the world’s population 
depends on water from cold regions, 
where warming can be expected to have 
similarly severe effects. 

A study published in the journal Climatic 
Change in February 2016 states that by 
2050, between 0.5 billion and 3.1 billion 
people will be exposed to an increase in 
water scarcity caused by climate change.
New strategies
How can the water science community 
best respond, to provide the 
understanding and decision-support 
tools needed to address these 
challenges? Incremental science, inching 
forward in small steps, is not up to the 
task, and a business-as-usual attitude 
cannot be tolerated. A more holistic 
scope, on a global scale, and strategic 
focus is needed. 
Firstly, there is an increasing need 
for better scientific understanding of 
the water environment in the face of 
unprecedented environmental and 
societal change. These issues cut across 
disciplinary boundaries. For example, 
to predict future river flows in western 
Canada requires an understanding of 
how ecosystems and agriculture will 
respond to climate change. 
In turn, the prediction of future climate 
depends on understanding the changes 
in land-atmosphere feedbacks – such as 
the greening of the shrub tundra in the 
North, or the proliferation of vegetation, 
especially shrubs, that will absorb more 
and more solar energy, thus contributing 
to global warming.
The new research paradigm should 
include a thorough knowledge of the 
social processes that accompany the 
effective – and reciprocal – engagement of 
science and policy. 
It is crucial to recognize that local 
stakeholders are an important source of 
knowledge. Indigenous communities, 
for example, have a wealth of multi-
generational knowledge of their land and 
its interactions with natural forces [see 
the Wide Angle section of this issue]. This 
knowledge must be used for the benefit 
of science. That is why – as part of the 
Global Water Futures (GWF) programme 
in Canada – we launched a project with 
Canada’s Aboriginal peoples in April 2018, 
to work together on a research strategy 
that can help solve the water problems 
facing these communities. 
Ultimately, the major challenges of 
water security lie with governance. The 
question of who has the power to make 
decisions (and how these decisions are 
made) is therefore crucial.
If the scientific understanding and 
prediction of water changes pose 
significant scientific challenges, so does 
water management. Water security in the 
twenty-first century is both a scientific 
and a social issue. Therefore, a new 
transdisciplinary approach is needed that 
will establish links between the natural 
and social sciences. 
To summarize: to prevent a major water 
crisis, we need to develop new scientific 
knowledge to understand the evolution 
of water systems that involve the 
relationship between man and nature; to 
establish new interdisciplinary modes of 
scientific collaboration to understand the 
interconnections of these systems and 
their societal implications; to integrate 
local knowledge into scientific research 
to address user needs; and to put in place 
more effective mechanisms to translate 
scientific knowledge into societal action.
Professor at the School of Environment 
and Sustainability at the University of 
Saskatchewan, Canada, and Emeritus 
professor of Hydrology at Imperial 
College, London, Howard S. Wheater 
(United Kingdom) has wide international 
experience of hydrology and water 
resources and is the author of 
seven books. 
The only certain thing about the future 
is that it will be highly uncertain, 
when it comes to climate and human 
socio-economic development – and 
interactions between the two. 
This uncertainty must be managed. Given 
the complexity of water systems and 
their interdependence with land, energy 
and food systems, at scales from local to 
global, managing uncertainty will require 
more adaptive and flexible strategies than 
those of the past. The past can no longer 
serve as a reliable guide to the future. 
We need to analyze vulnerability and 
adopt strategies that foster resilience – the 
ability of a system to absorb shock and 
continue to regenerate without changing 
to a new state. 
An interdisciplinary 
approach
It is widely recognized, for example, that 
there has been a disconnect between 
the science produced for climate 
impact assessment and long-term 
water planning or climate adaptation. 
In general, for science to be effective 
in delivering solutions, it must address 
problems that are deemed relevant to 
decision-makers, to deliver tools to users 
in a timely and useful format, and to 
include user input. The latter provides 
the credibility and legitimacy needed to 
resolve the politically contentious and 
socially significant issues that surround 
water resources management today.
This illustrates how important it is 
for scientists to recognize that the 
engagement of all stakeholders is a 
necessity, not an option.  
