Twenty-five years after South Africa’s 
hard-won freedom, has the country made 
progress in the fight against racism? 
I think that the answer to that must be 
yes, simply because the racial divides that 
characterized South Africa during apartheid 
were quite stark, suspicions because of 
race ran deep, and instances of gratuitous 
violence against black people had almost 
reached a level of social acceptability. 
Things have changed dramatically since 
then. But that does not mean that there 
aren’t any serious instances of racism. The 
difference is that when these happen, large 
numbers of South Africans, black and white, 
are outraged. In addition, there is a legal 
framework to deal with racism.
Are the legislative measures proposed in 
the new bill to criminalize acts of racism  
necessary to promote a united South Africa? 
Ideally, we would like to combat racism 
through voluntary initiatives, appealing 
to the better sense of people. Historically, 
most South Africans would agree that in the 
absence of criminal sanctions, the new laws 
could be important, giving license to act 
strongly against those who think they can 
get away with paying a fine, since no current 
processes provide for criminal action.
Based on a legal and constitutional 
framework where we are willing to send 
someone to jail for stealing a loaf of 
bread, why, considering the hierarchy of 
seriousness of the acts, do we not send 
someone to jail for racist behaviour? You 
can’t be racist and pay your way out of 
it.  The idea is to use the law to deal with 
extreme cases – one hopes it is used 
sparingly. 
Jody Kollapen, interviewed by Edwin Naidu, South African journalist
Twenty-five years after attaining democracy, South Africa has taken 
giant strides towards forging a united nation. But overcoming racism 
and realizing Nelson Mandela’s vision of a nation that belongs to all who 
live in it, remains a wonderful ideal – which still requires a lot of work, 
according to Justice Jody Kollapen. Both an arbitrator and a victim of 
racist cases (he was refused a haircut as recently as in October 2003!), this 
human rights defender maintains that there is enough goodwill to build 
on Mandela’s vision.
Analysts refer to racism as an unresolved 
problem, inherited from the past, which the 
nation has failed to adequately address.  
What is your view?
I agree that the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC) has never dealt with 
the issue of racism. It dealt with crimes of 
apartheid but not apartheid as a crime. The 
large majority of South Africans who were 
victims and perpetrators never appeared 
before the TRC to talk about racism under 
apartheid. Sadly, the TRC may have got 
caught up with the romantic notion of 
reconciliation without addressing apartheid, 
discrimination – and the fact that there 
can be no reconciliation without social and 
economic transformation. It was a missed 
opportunity. But I don’t think it can be 
addressed via legislative means.
What must be done to ensure that a sense of 
unity prevails in South Africa?
As long as South Africa remains the most 
unequal society in the world, and as long 
as we trace that back to having its roots 
in colonialism and apartheid, we are not 
going to reach that sense of unity. Even if we 
do not succeed in creating the egalitarian 
society which some of us wish for, we can 
certainly achieve a more equal society.
But for that to happen, we need to be 
mature in the debates on issues such as 
resources, affirmative action, access to 
land, and we can’t be defensive. If we don’t 
transform society in a meaningful way, that 
sense of unity may evade us.
Mandela’s South Africa: Reality
or distant dream? 

In the 8 May 2019 elections, some politicians 
used race as an election tool. What is your 
opinion on their conduct?  
Unfortunately, race continues to define our 
social and economic order, so it defines the 
political order as well. It is easy to use the 
notion of race  to stir up anxiety. This is not 
unique to South Africa – we’ve seen it in 
Europe and the United States as well. But 
given our history, it is easy to evoke feelings 
of insecurity among people. When people 
have these feelings, I’m not sure that they 
are able to make the right electoral choices. 
I hope we reach a level of maturity to deal 
with this. The long-term damage caused by 
the use of race as a campaign tool may not 
be quantifiable, but it serves to divide, and 
runs counter to the argument of the united 
nation we seek. 
In his inaugural speech on 10 May 1994, 
Nelson Mandela called for reconciliation and 
an end to racism. Have we made progress 
towards achieving his vision for South 
Africa?
We’ve made considerable progress. Naked 
acts of racism still occur, but they’re not the 
norm, and attract universal condemnation, 
which is very good. However, I see a real 
problem in the fact that there are no anti-
racism campaigns in schools, public or 
private. We have programmes to deal with 
gender-based violence, xenophobia, etc. 
but I’m not aware of any campaigns against 
racism – surely we need these.
According to the Freedom Charter, South 
Africa belongs to all who live in it.  But this 
remains a wonderful ideal, and we remain 
far from achieving it. Yes, in some respects 
we have made progress. Certainly, we are 
a better society today, we must take solace 
from that, we’re not a society at war with 
each other, and there remains enough 
goodwill to build on the vision that Madiba 
has left us. 
An acting Justice of the Constitutional 
Court of South Africa since July 2017, 
Jody Kollapen has served as a Judge of 
the High Court of South Africa, in Pretoria, 
since 2011. He is also the Chairperson of 
the South African Law Reform Commission. 
Kollapen served as the head of the South 
African Human Rights Commission, from 
2001 to 2009, prior to his appointment as 
a judge.
Atteridgeville, a work  from The Stone, 
the Gun, and the Plate, the first of a series 
of collaborative projects by South African 
photographer Gideon Mendel – who took 
photos of riots in his country in 1985-1986 
– and Argentinian artist Marcelo Brodsky, 
who is updating them today with colours 
and words, to narrate history and convey 
its meaning to new generations. 
© Marcelo Brodsky & Gideon Mendel / ARTCO
