The Sámi 
of Jokkmokk:
Challenging modernity
Marie Roué
The territory in Swedish Lapland, where the indigenous Sámi 
raise their reindeer, is threatened by logging, the railway, dams 
and urban growth. To survive, the herders have adopted a variety 
of strategies that range from the partial adaptation of an urban 
lifestyle, to using their traditional knowledge to accurately 
understand the state of their pastures.
A tremendous capacity 
to adapt
Let’s take the example of Jokkmokk. This 
major centre for reindeer husbandry in 
Sweden, in Norrbotten (which covers 
100,000 square kilometres, or a quarter of 
the country), is home to some 4,000 Sámi 
reindeer herders. They face many threats 
to their territory but at the same time, 
have an extraordinary capacity for 
resilience. Did they not adapt the first 
time, by inventing reindeer husbandry 
– even though they were fishermen, 
trappers and wild reindeer hunters – 
when the arrival of the first Scandinavian 
settlers four or five centuries ago caused 
a drastic decrease in the population of 
wild animals?
The Sámi also managed to overcome the 
devastation caused at the beginning of 
the twentieth century, when the English 
and the Scandinavians exploited their 
rivers – by creating dams to generate 
electricity – and dug their mountains to 
extract iron ore and produce steel.
The reindeer herders resisted again in 
the 1960s, when forestry became an 
industrial activity in Sweden and Finland 
at the expense of forest biodiversity. 
Later, in the 1970s, the Sámi created one 
of the first environmental alliances in 
Alta, Norway – bringing together human 
rights defenders and indigenous peoples 
to oppose the dam that would have 
led to the demolition of an important 
winter village.
The advance of colonization increasingly 
threatened their fishing and hunting 
rights and their rights to the land. Yet the 
reindeer herders are still there.
Facing serious threats
The Sámi of Jokkmokk take their reindeer 
to spend the summer in the mountains, 
descending to the forests in the plains 
in autumn. These forests are now being 
exploited industrially and the pastoralists 
are forced to share their usufruct rights 
with forest landowners. This coexistence 
poses a considerable challenge because 
the timber growers practise clear-cutting 
the forests before reseeding them, and 
their heavy machinery degrades the soil 
and destroys the lichen that reindeer feed 
on, by digging snow. It takes thirty to fifty 
years for the lichen to grow back!
And that's not all. The breeding territory 
for the reindeer is now traversed 
and divided by a railway line that 
transports iron ore and passengers. 
Dams and artificial lakes obstruct the 
herders’ migration routes, while roads, 
cities and mines further reduce the 
grazing pastures.
Today, the Sámi must overcome a new 
challenge: climate change. In the north, 
it is not so much the global warming 
that is feared, as its consequences on the 
instability of winter temperatures. When 
the snow is covered with a layer of ice 
after successive heating and cooling, the 
reindeer can no longer dig for food. 
The Sámi, previously known as the Lapps, 
have lived in Europe’s Arctic Circle for 
thousands of years. It is estimated that 
there are now nearly 80,000 of them, the 
majority of whom live in the far north, 
in Sápmi (Lapland), which spans four 
countries – Finland, Norway, Russia and 
Sweden. Some have settled further south, 
notably in Oslo and Stockholm.
The indigenous people have set up a 
Sámi Council, which allows them to think 
about the future of their nation together, 
beyond the national borders that have 
never prevented them from feeling that 
they are one people. They have always 
had the remarkable ability to embody 
modernity while remaining rooted in 
tradition. They gave the United Nations 
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues 
(UNPFII) its first president and are actively 
involved in the Arctic Council. 
Regarding their political representation, 
the Sámi Parliament of Finland was 
created in 1973, followed by the Sámi 
Parliament of Norway in 1989 and the 
Sámi Parliament of Sweden, in 1993.
The Sámi practise many trades. Some of 
them are well-known artists or intellectuals, 
painters, sculptors, journalists, writers, 
filmmakers or singers – such as the Finnish 
writer, musician and artist Nils-Aslak 
Valkeapää (1943-2001) or the Norwegian 
musician Mari Boine. However, the 
traditional Sámi profession par excellence 
remains that of reindeer herding.

Unlike Western science, which has a 
static vision of load capacity (the number 
of animals that a given territory can 
support) based on a quantified botanical 
analysis, Sámi science is the science of 
immanence.
To assess the condition of a pasture, 
they dig and examine the layers and 
crystallography of the snow, thus 
estimating successive events through 
the seasons – the evolution of wind, 
temperatures, forest, ground vegetation – 
and their interrelationships with reindeer. 
Therefore, they may not know the richness 
of the pasture in absolute terms, but are 
experts at gauging its condition at the time 
and place of their analysis, which allows 
them to act in the most appropriate way. 
As climate change specialists, the Sámi 
base their resilience on their knowledge 
and practices, even if their capacity 
for action is limited by the severity of 
global change.
A French-Canadian researcher at 
the Laboratory of Eco-anthropology 
and Ethnobiology at the National 
Museum of Natural History (MNHN) in 
Paris, Marie Roué is Senior Research 
Director at the National Centre for 
Scientific Research (Centre national de 
la recherche scientifique, CNRS). 
To gather his reindeer, 
this Sami herder from Kautokeino, 
Norway, uses a long band 
of jute cloth.
Modern and ancient 
survival strategies
When reindeer can no longer feed 
themselves, the herders are forced to 
buy hay or dry food pellets (which are 
expensive and not always tolerated by 
the animals), or better still, bags of lichen. 
Sometimes they gather lichen in areas 
where the reindeer cannot go, such as 
around an airport, for example. These 
are part of the new survival strategies 
adopted by the Sámi.
In addition, to supplement their income, 
they now try to sell reindeer meat 
directly or resort to temporary work in 
tourism. Women often turn to permanent 
employment as teachers, doctors, 
journalists, dressmakers or shopkeepers 
to balance the family budget – which 
has been weakened by the fall in their 
reindeer-herding income. 
But the Sámi’s best weapon is their 
traditional knowledge. With a precise and 
detailed vocabulary, their knowledge of 
snow and metamorphism allows them 
to constantly monitor the condition of 
the pastures.

The Sámi 
examine 
the snow 
to estimate 
the evolution 
of the wind, 
temperatures, 
forest and 
ground 
vegetation
