rs For three days every 
year in June, the 
inhabitants of Quehue 
district take part in 
a centuries-old ritual: 
the restoration of the 
Q’eswachaka rope 
bridge which spans 
the Apurímac River.
 © Jordi Busqué 

It takes about four hours of cautious 
driving on winding roads to reach 
Quehue from Cusco. In the first week of 
June 2019, as the rainy season ends, this 
village, located in the southern Andes in 
Peru, is about to experience a very special 
moment. As is customary at this time 
each year, the inhabitants take part in a 
centuries-old ritual that lasts three days: 
the restoration of the Q’eswachaka rope 
suspension bridge. 
This bridge is built over the Quehue gorge 
of the Apurímac (which means “oracle 
of the mountain god” in Quechua) river. 
It connects the Huinchiri, Chaupibanda 
and Chocayhua communities, which live 
on the left bank, to the Qollana Quehue 
community on the right bank. It is the 
last remaining bridge made of vegetable 
fibres in Peru. A symbol of the link 
between the inhabitants and nature, their 
traditions and their history, Q’eswachaka 
is considered sacred. 
A few days before the ritual begins, the 
inhabitants cut q’oya, a hardy grass that 
grows in the humid highlands of the 
Andes. It is then twisted and extended, 
to form q’eswa, a long cord. The villagers 
learn how to weave the fibres from 
an early age. Sitting on a sidewalk in 
the village, a woman weaves one of 
these ropes with amazing dexterity. 
Jordi Busqué, photojournalist based in South America
Every year in the first week of June, the inhabitants of Peru’s Quehue 
district gather to restore the rope suspension bridge that connects 
the two banks of the Apurímac river. This centuries-old secular 
Andean tradition has been inscribed on the Representative List of 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity since 2013. 
As the country has relatively high seismic 
activity, the flexibility provided by rope 
suspension bridges was an advantage. 
The downside was that these bridges 
were less resistant to bad weather than 
stone bridges. In a climate where it rains 
almost every day during the course of 
several months, the ropes eventually 
deteriorate, and the bridges have to be 
reconstructed periodically. Although the 
bridge is no longer the only road that 
links the two banks of the Apurímac, the 
tradition continues year after year. 
During the first day of the reconstruction, 
men gather around the old bridge and 
weave the smaller ropes – woven by the 
women – into bigger ones. The head of 
each household brings a q’eswa, about 
seventy metres long. The roads leading to 
the bridge are packed with motorcycles 
loaded with ropes. 
An Inca suspension
bridge is restored in Peru 
This article is published on the 
occasion of the 14th session of the 
Intergovernmental Committee for 
the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage, held from 
9 to 14 December 2019 in Bogota, 
Colombia. 
Another beats the grass with a round 
stone and then soaks it in water from the 
river, to make it more pliable. Everything 
must be ready for the next day, when the 
reconstruction of the bridge begins. 
A remarkable network 
of roads
The construction, which uses a technique 
that is over 600 years old, is testimony to 
one of the most remarkable achievements 
of the Inca civilization. They built a network 
of roads – the Qhapaq Ñan – to connect 
their vast territories. This could only be 
achieved by challenging the rugged 
geography of Peru, crossed by the deep 
gorges and canyons created by the rivers. 
A few days before the work begins, 
the inhabitants cut q’oya, a special grass 
that grows in the high Andean areas, and 
twist it to form long cords. They learn how 
to weave these ropes from an early age.

A traditional master of ceremonies, called 
paqo, presents offerings to the apus, 
the mountain spirits that are believed 
to protect the locals. A small altar, on 
which llama fetuses, corn-cobs and other 
ritual objects are placed, is put up near 
the bridge. The elder men, acting as 
traditional priests, offer alcohol to the 
men participating in the reconstruction. 
A sheep has been sacrificed to the apus, 
and its heart is burnt in a small fire 
maintained at the foot of the bridge. 
The priests want to make sure that 
the workers are protected by the gods 
and that no accidents occur during 
the reconstruction. 
The ropes are installed on the second day, 
once the old bridge has been detached, 
and falls into the river, where it is carried 
by the current and floats downstream. 
It will simply decompose, as it is made 
only of grass. Tradition dictates that 
only men are allowed to work on the 
actual reconstruction. 
The women remain in the upper part of 
the gorge, weaving the smaller ropes. The 
main support of the bridge comes from 
six large three-ply ropes, each about a 
foot thick, made up of about 120 thinner 
ropes. Four of the large ropes will form the 
floor of the bridge, while the other two 
serve as handrails. All six ropes are securely 
attached to large anchors made of carved 
stone, on either side of the canyon. 
Pre-Columbian 
tradition of community 
work
Giving these heavy ropes the necessary 
tension, by human traction alone, 
takes up most of the second day. The 
pulling is done in rhythm, according to 
the instructions of the lead architects. 
The various stages of construction 
are supervised by the elders and two 
chakaruwaq, specialized craftsmen 
whose weaving techniques are passed 
down from generation to generation. 
This reconstruction draws on mink’a, a 
pre-Columbian tradition of community 
service, which consists of Andean 
farmers carrying out important work, the 
benefits of which are shared by the entire 
community. 
On the third day, a handful of men 
who have no fear of heights, walk the 
length of the structure, attaching small 
ropes from the handrail to the floor of 
the bridge. This makes it possible for 
everyone to safely cross the bridge. Two 
groups start on either side of the bridge, 
and eventually meet at its centre. When 
the last rope is in place and the bridge is 
finally ready, the workers raise their arms, 
causing the crowd to cheer loudly. 
The workers are the first to use the new 
bridge, but everybody is eager to emulate 
them. For safety reasons, no more than 
four people are allowed to cross the 
structure at any one time. 
On the third day of the ritual, men on 
either side of the bridge attach the last 
cords that make up the bridge’s guard-rail.

The crowd is large, and it takes a long 
time before everyone has crossed the 
gorge. No modern materials, tools 
or machines have been used during 
the entire reconstruction process of 
the bridge – only ropes of grass and 
human power. 
The annual rebuilding ritual ends with 
festivities in which all the inhabitants 
participate. A stage has been set up 
and a music group plays traditional 
songs from the region. Schoolchildren 
from neighbouring villages take part 
in a dance competition. In a few years, 
it will be these boys and girls who will 
take over, to rebuild the Q’eswachaka 
suspension bridge. 
No more than four people 
are allowed to be on the structure 
simultaneously.
A symbol of the link 
between the inhabitants and 
nature, their traditions and 
their history, Q’eswachaka 
is considered sacred
