Interview by Saturnin Gómez 
Manon Barbeau, it has been said, holds the camera in her heart the 
way others hold it in their hands. For the last fifteen years, she has 
invested all her enthusiasm and know-how in Wapikoni, a project 
that provides young people in indigenous communities with mobile 
audiovisual production tools. More than a thousand documentaries 
have been produced as a result, giving visibility to these stigmatized 
communities. But the achievements of Wapikoni go far beyond the 
cinema – and beyond Canada.
Manon Barbeau:
A camera
in her heart
How did you come up with the idea 
of meeting the indigenous peoples 
of Canada?
It goes back to my youth. I think I 
inherited my father’s interest in images, 
and my mother’s spirit of activism. My 
father was a painter and one of the 
sixteen signatories of the Refus Global 
(total refusal) Manifesto in 1948, that 
opposed the influence of the clergy in 
Quebec and advocated a free society. 
My parents have separated. My mother 
left for the United States, where she was 
involved in the civil rights movement for 
black Americans.
Years later, I became interested in what 
had become of the children of that 
generation, and directed the film Les 
enfants de Refus global (The children 
of total refusal). That experience made 
me realize how art, and especially 
cinema, has a transformative power. 
When you get involved in a film the way 
I did, you’re not the same person at the 
beginning and at the end of the shoot.
I wanted to share this feeling of 
transformation with those who 
undoubtedly need it most – the 
marginalized. I gave a voice to street 
youth and to prisoners, by holding 
up a mirror to them – that, instead of 
reflecting an image of prejudice and fear, 
allowed them to see beyond.
Then, in the early 2000s, I went to 
meet the most marginalized of the 
marginalized – Canada’s indigenous 
communities.
Could you tell us about your first 
experience with them?
I decided to write the screenplay for 
a film, La fin du mépris (The end of 
contempt), with fifteen young Atikamek 
people from Wemotaci, a reservation 
located between Manawan and 
Obedjiwan, in Haute-Mauricie, Quebec. 
I admired their talent and, at the same 
time, I discovered the wounds they bore 
within them as part of a painful legacy 
that is passed down from generation 
to generation.
Among the young screenwriters, one 
girl stood out for her intelligence, her 
dynamism and her generosity. She was 
a leading figure in her community. Her 
name was Wapikoni Awashish. One day, 
her car hit a logging truck on the road. 
Her life was felled by the very people 
who cut down the trees on her land. She 
was twenty years old. It was a terrible 
shock! In her memory, we conceived 
the idea of  a place where young people 
could gather and create. That was 
how the Wapikoni project started. It 
was set up in 2004 by the indigenous 
community itself, with the support of the 
National Film Board and various public 
and private partners.

An introductory workshop on 
filmmaking, organized in 2017 
for indigenous youth 
from Lac-Simon, Canada.
Since then, caravans converted into film 
studios have been traversing Canada. 
How is this working out in the field?
Indeed, we created our first mobile 
audiovisual production unit, Wapikoni 
Mobile, in a ten-metre-long trailer – the 
bedroom became an editing room and 
the shower a sound studio. We have 
five of these mobiles today. They visit 
communities at their invitation. The 
work is supervised by filmmakers who 
are trainers – teachers who specialize 
in working with young people with 
difficulties, and local coordinators who 
schedule our visits.
We stay in the community for a month. 
On average, five short films are produced 
during this time, on topics chosen by the 
young people themselves. At the end, 
the films are screened for members of the 
community. Later, these films are screened 
at hundreds of events and festivals around 
the world – helping to promote this rich 
and often unknown culture.
What do these young people talk about 
in their films?
Everything! Love, family, nature, 
territory… Many talk about traditions, 
of their identity, of the rupture between 
tradition and modernity. 

But they also produce contemporary 
creations, such as videos of community 
singers, often in indigenous languages. 
Elders also take this opportunity to 
transmit their knowledge in front of 
the camera, with complete confidence, 
because it is often their grandchildren 
who are interviewing and filming them.
Are these young people transformed 
by this experience?
Certainly. In general, this contributes 
to the affirmation of their pride in their 
identity and culture. It also revives the 
hope of finding a place in society, other 
than that of a consumer. There are also 
those who discover their vocation for 
cinema or music and who continue 
their training.
Wapikoni also serves as an educational 
intervention project. The team 
collaborates with local community 
resources to prevent dropping out 
of school, addiction and suicide – by 
helping youth to develop self-esteem 
and independence.
Can this approach be replicated in other 
communities around the world?
It can be, and we have more than one 
example as proof. Our pedagogical 
method of learning by creating has 
proven to be applicable elsewhere in 
the world, with adaptations to local 
conditions.
We have established partnerships in 
South America (Bolivia, Peru, Colombia, 
Panama and Chile). We’ve also worked 
with the Sámi [see our article on p. 26] 
in Norway, and more recently, I went to 
Budapest to develop a project to break 
the ostracism that affects Roma youth.
Other vulnerable populations have also 
been included in our programme, such 
as Syrian refugees in Turkey, or Bedouin 
communities in the Palestinian Territories 
and Jordan. In 2014, Wapikoni founded 
the International Network of Aboriginal 
Audiovisual Creation (INAAC), with the 
objective of exchanging experiences and 
developing co-productions.
You have been involved with Wapikoni 
for a long time. What has the project 
achieved in concrete terms?
On the individual level, it has helped 
save some lives. It’s not me who says this, 
it’s those who believe that they were 
saved who do.  
Collectively, it has helped to restore 
hope and self-confidence to indigenous 
communities, and to highlight them 
and give them international visibility. 
Finally, I also see Wapikoni as a caravan 
that is slowly but surely moving 
towards realizing a dream that I have 
cherished for a long time – the birth of 
indigenous cinema.
Canadian screenwriter and 
documentary filmmaker 
Manon Barbeau co-founded 
Wapikoni in 2004 with the Atikamek 
Nation Council, the First Nations 
Youth Council and the support of the 
National Film Board of Canada. She 
has received numerous awards for her 
film work and for her commitment to 
the indigenous peoples in particular. 
On 16 November 2018, she was 
awarded the UNESCO-Madanjeet Singh 
Prize for the Promotion of Tolerance 
and Non-Violence.
Photo taken during the shooting 
of the film Madezin, directed by 
Édouard Poucachiche of the Anishnabe 
Nation of Lac-Simon.
