Catriona McKinnon 
Climate denial has increased the risk of catastrophic global change. 
Should international criminal law be used against those who 
promote this dangerous trend? Economic and political leaders can no 
longer pretend it is business as usual. Whether they actively induce 
environmental harm or just ignore the existential threat against the 
survival of the human species, states and corporations must be held 
accountable for their actions or inaction regarding climate change.
Climate crimes 
must be brought to justice
We reserve the hard treatment of 
punishment for conduct that damages 
the things we hold most fundamentally 
valuable. Climate change is causing precisely 
such damage. 
Over the last 250 years or so, we have 
burned fossil fuels for cheap energy, 
destroyed carbon sinks, grown the global 
population, and failed to halt the malign 
A fire has started in the theatre, from which 
there are no exits. Unchecked, the fire will 
kill and injure many in the theatre, starting 
with those in the cheapest seats. Many 
people can smell the smoke, but some 
others have not noticed it yet. Some people 
are trying to warn everyone so that the fire 
can be contained before it spreads out of 
control. Another group – sitting mainly in 
the most expensive seats – is trying to shout 
loudly that there is no fire, or that it is not 
serious, or that there is plenty of time left to 
put it out. This group uses emotive language 
and insists that the other group is not to be 
trusted. 
Many people in the theatre are confused by 
these conflicting messages or convinced by 
the fire deniers. There are enough people in 
this combined set to significantly slow down 
the efforts of those listening to the accurate 
warnings, those who are trying to put out 
the fire. In this scenario, those shouting “No 
fire!” ought to be silenced, because there is 
a fire that requires urgent and immediate 
action to prevent it from spreading and 
becoming uncontrollable. But the fire is not 
being tackled properly because many of the 
people in the theatre do not know whom to 
believe.  
Can we compare those who deny the 
reality of climate change to the group that 
occupies the best seats in the theatre? The 
answer seems obvious: yes.
Accelerating the 
extinction of humanity 
Criminal sanctions are the most potent 
tools we have to mark out conduct that 
lies beyond all limits of toleration. Criminal 
conduct violates basic rights and destroys 
human security. 

influence of corporate interests on 
political action that could have made 
mitigation manageable. Now, we have a 
window of just ten years or less to avoid 
using up the carbon budget for 1.5 °C, 
according to the 2018 Special Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). If we continue on our current 
trajectory of emissions without aggressive 
mitigation, we could see warming in the 
range of 4–6.1 °C above pre-industrial 
averages by 2100. Even if all countries meet 
their current mitigation targets under the 
Paris Agreement 2015 (COP21), we are likely 
to see warming of at least 2.6 °C by 2100.
A 4–6.1 °C rise in temperature by 2100 
would be catastrophic. Large areas of the 
earth would become uninhabitable as sea 
levels rise and temperatures soar. Severe 
weather events, crop failure, and conflict 
in the face of mass migration never before 
seen in human history, would place intense 
pressure on remaining habitable places. 
In these fragile and febrile conditions, 
positive feedback from warming could put 
humanity at risk of extinction, according 
to the journal, Futures, September 2018. 
This feedback occurs when tipping points 
are passed in the climate system, causing 
processes to be unleashed that exacerbate 
warming. For example, the transformation of 
the Amazon forest from the world’s largest 
carbon sink to a carbon source; or, the 
massive retreat of polar ice, which reduces 
the planet’s reflectivity, leading it to warm 
at a greater speed. These tipping points are 
described in the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment 
Report (AR5) as a critical threshold at which 
global or regional climate changes from a 
stable state to another stable state.
Temperature rises of 4–6.1 °C are not likely, 
but they are not science fiction either. 
Each year that passes without aggressive 
mitigation to reach net-zero emissions by 
2050 makes this existential threat more real. 
Even if the Paris Agreement aggressively 
ratchets up mitigation ambition to close 
the emissions gap by 2030, it remains the 
case that we have already reached 1 °C 
of warming. Given the time lag between 
emissions and the warming they induce – 
due to the long lifetime of carbon molecules 
in the atmosphere – further increases are to 
be expected.
Between irresponsible 
behaviour …
Should we use criminal law to tackle 
climate change? The current generation 
of people alive in the Anthropocene is 
capable of damaging and degrading the 
environment in ways that could make 
humanity go extinct. Postericide is a morally 
required response to humanity’s changed 
circumstances in the Anthropocene. The 
scope of international criminal law makes 
it the right site to address the existential 
threats created by climate change. 
International criminal law aims to protect 
the entire human community irrespective of 
national borders, now and into the future. 
International criminal law expresses the 
values that bind the human community 
together across time. It asserts the 
condemnation of “unimaginable atrocities 
that deeply shock the conscience of 
humanity” – as stipulated in the Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court 
(ICC) of 17 July 1998, which defines, inter 
alia, the international crimes over which the 
ICC has jurisdiction.
For there to be a crime, there must be a 
criminal. The death and suffering caused 
by climate impacts is deeply shocking, but 
this is not enough to prompt prosecution 
under international criminal law. Death and 
suffering are caused by volcanic eruptions, 
yet there are no culpable agents in these 
cases.
The current climate crisis has been caused 
by human activity over the last two and 
a half centuries or so, leading to the 
accumulation of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere. The crisis is in large part an 
unintended consequence of action across 
history that has led to the destruction of  
carbon sinks, increased carbon flows, and 
concentrated carbon stocks.
Most of this conduct is beyond the 
legitimate reach of international criminal 
law, not least because the relevant people 
are dead. Most, but not all.
… and postericide
I have proposed that international criminal 
law should be expanded to include a new 
criminal offence that I call postericide. It 
is committed by intentional or reckless 
conduct fit to bring about the extinction of 
humanity. Postericide is committed when 
humanity is put at risk of extinction by 
conduct performed either with the intention 
of making humanity go extinct, or with 
the knowledge that the conduct is fit to 
have this effect. When a person knows that 
their conduct will impose an impermissible 
risk on another and acts anyway, they are 
reckless. It is in the domain of reckless 
conduct, making climate change worse, that 
we should look for postericidal conduct. 
The scope of international 
criminal law makes it the 
right site to address the 
existential threats created 
by climate change
“Climate denial has benefited from the 
generosity of the fossil fuel industry.”

Climate denial has seriously impeded 
aggressive mitigation efforts that could have 
averted our present climate emergency. It 
has magnified the risk that humanity locks 
in to catastrophic global climate change. The 
people in positions of authority in states, 
or industrial groups whose lies have put 
us and our descendants in peril, should be 
held accountable. The damage that climate 
deniers do is heinous, and they have no 
excuses. The time has come to prosecute 
them for postericide.
Professor of Political Theory at the University 
of Exeter, United Kingdom, Catriona 
McKinnon has published numerous 
articles and books on climate justice, and 
on toleration and liberal political ideals. 
She is currently completing a monograph 
defending postericide (Endangering 
Humanity: An International Crime), writing an 
introductory book on climate justice, and 
researching the ethical questions raised by 
geoengineering. 
Hummingbird Rising, a mandala for 
climate justice in San Francisco, United 
States, by American artist John Quigley, 
2018. It is a message to world leaders that 
the climate has changed and so must we.  
No one person’s emissions are fit to bring 
about human extinction as a result of 
climate impacts – the many private jets 
and oil wells they own can do so, however. 
But individual people in their roles as 
political and corporate leaders can exert 
extensive control over how much worse 
climate change becomes as a result of their 
executive action. A country’s president 
can withdraw an entire state from a global 
agreement on mitigation; a Chief Executive 
Officer can authorize the withholding of 
information about the progress and impacts 
of climate change because it threatens the 
corporation’s bottom line.
Individuals often have control over 
conduct they do not perform themselves 
– for example, by giving direct orders to 
subordinates, or by virtue of the special 
relationship in which they stand to others 
whose conduct causes harm. This means 
that we can assign vicarious liability to 
individuals of power, authority and influence 
within groups that, as collectives, worsen 
climate change in ways fit to make humanity 
go extinct. Just as international criminal 
law holds military leaders to account for 
genocide committed by their troops, it 
should hold political and economic leaders 
to account for postericide committed under 
their authority. These leaders should go to 
trial at the ICC and be held to account at the 
bar of the human community’s fundamental 
shared values.
Who should be prosecuted for postericide? 
We could start by examining the established 
international network of well-funded 
organizations devoted to organized climate 
denial (For more on this subject, read “Text-
mining the signals of climate change doubt”, 
in the journal Global Environmental Change, 
Volume 36, January 2016).  The epicentre of 
this activity is in the United States. A set of 
Conservative think-tanks has deliberately 
deceived the public and policymakers 
about the realities of climate change. Their 
ideologically-driven climate denial has been 
heavily funded by the fossil fuel industry; 
which includes, for example, Koch Industries 
and ExxonMobil. This climate denial has had 
a significant impact on public opinion and 
has impeded legislation to tackle climate 
change. 
Vicarious criminal 
liability
Should Rex Tillerson [the former CEO of 
ExxonMobil, who also served as US Secretary 
of State from February 2017 to March 2018], 
Charles Koch and David Koch [the owners 
of Koch Industries] be tried for the crime 
of postericide at the ICC? Their vicarious 
criminal liability would be generated by 
their authorization of multiple acts of 
climate denial by others, without which 
early aggressive political action on climate 
change would have been more likely. 
