Shifting borders: 
Invisible, but very real
Today’s borders are no longer necessarily made of bricks 
and barbed wire. They are increasingly becoming moving barriers 
that rely on cutting-edge technologies and complex regulations 
to impose travel restrictions on citizens. The COVID-19 pandemic 
has further accentuated this phenomenon. 
Ayelet Shachar
Director at the Max Planck Institute for 
the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity, 
in Göttingen, Germany . The Shifting Border: 
Legal Cartographies of Migration and Mobility 
is her most recent book .
In 1989, with the fall of the Berlin Wall, 
many predicted that sealed gates 
would soon become relics of a bygone 
era. Today, we find a different reality. 
Instead of disappearing, borders are 
metamorphosing. The border itself has 
evolved to become a moving barrier, an 
unmoored legal construct. It has broken 
free of the map; it may extend beyond 
the edge of territories or into their interiors. 
The unmooring of state power from any 
fixed geographical marker has created 
a new paradigm: the shifting border. 
The shifting border is not fixed in time 
and place; it consists of legal portals 
rather than physical barriers. Responses 
to the global pandemic have accelerated 
this trend. 
In January 2020, when a cluster 
of mysterious viral pneumonia cases 
struck in Wuhan, China, neighbouring 
Asian countries – that had already borne 
the brunt of the SARS and MERS outbreaks 
– wasted no time. In addition to public 
health responses, they introduced travel 
bans that restricted access to their 
territories. 
Regulation of entry can now happen 
in foreign transit hubs, located even 
thousands of miles away. In Canada, for 
instance, anyone – including its citizens 
– presenting with COVID-19 symptoms 
were barred from boarding a Canada-
bound plane. With this move, the country  
stretched its borders outwards both 
conceptually and legally – relocating 
its border-control activities to overseas 
gateways, primarily in Europe and Asia.  
A science-fiction reality
Remarkably, on the latest count 
(May 2020), nearly 200 countries have 
imposed such travel restrictions by 
banning inbound and outbound travel. 
At the height of the crisis, ninety-one per 
cent of the global population were living 
in countries that had introduced travel 
restrictions in response to COVID-19. 
None of these legally mandated bans on 
entry (and in some countries, exit) required 
even one battalion of soldiers to move 
to the edge of the territory, or a single 
sack of cement to be placed at the border. 
Instead, governments shifted the border 
to regulate mobility by blocking travellers 
before they embark, and even after they 
reach their destination – by being told 
to wear GPS wristbands, for example. 
Experts in the travel industry have 
suggested that individuals may prefer 
to pre-quarantine in their home countries. 
Until a vaccine is developed, it is clear 
that the management of mobility 
and migration will be deeply altered. 
 Backscatter Blueprint 
(La Maleta), cyanotype from 
the series X-Ray Vision vs. 
Invisibility, by artist Noelle 
Mason. Based on an image  
from the website of the United 
States Border Patrol.   
©
 N
oe
lle
 M
as
on
Instead of disappearing 
with the fall of the  
Berlin Wall, borders 
are metamorphosing

What resembled science fiction is now 
a reality. Israel’s Ben-Gurion airport, already 
known for its strict security protocol, is now 
in the process of developing a “seamless” 
check-in process, whereby no human 
agent is involved. The goal is to create 
“coronavirus-free transportation hubs” 
and insulated “zones” or “bubbles” in which 
travel will resume. Only the healthy will be 
permitted through these “sterile” corridors. 
These developments raise significant 
ethical and legal dilemmas. Health will 
become an invaluable asset, a prerequisite 
to travel. Countries including Chile, 
Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom 
are exploring the idea of “immunity 
passports” – granting access to public life 
and mobility for some, while reducing 
it for others. 
Smart tunnels 
and biometric borders
Even prior to the pandemic, governments 
were increasing their reliance on 
the biometric regulation of migration 
– which provides unprecedented 
technological “see-all” eyes to monitor 
and track everyone’s mobility everywhere. 
With the simultaneous rise of big data 
and the creation of vast databases that 
record biometric information of travellers, 
our bodies will become our admission 
tickets as biometric borders expand their 
reach. Countries including Australia, China, 
Japan, the United States, and the United 
Arab Emirates are leading the way. Dubai 
International Airport has introduced a pilot 
of new “biometric borders”– known as 
smart tunnels – that identify passengers 
through scans of a user’s iris and face.
To achieve this Orwellian vision, 
the location, operation, and logic 
of the border have to be redefined 
to allow governments or their delegates 
to screen and intercept travellers earlier, 
more frequently, and more distantly. Thus, 
travellers are tracked as they move through 
multiple check-points along the travel 
continuum. 
As part of the effort to achieve migration 
and mobility management, an “electronic 
travel authorization” will now be required 
for the European Union – even for those 
who benefit from visa-free travel and are 
in possession of internationally coveted 
passports. The European Travel Information 
and Authorization System (ETIAS), to be 
launched in 2022, will serve as a clearing-
house for pre-travel authorization 
for visitors to all twenty-six countries 
in the Schengen area. 
Linked to their passports, this additional 
layer of information-gathering creates 
a powerful yet invisible shifting 
border that is operational anywhere 
in the world – prior to departure, adjusting 
itself to the location and risk profile 
of the traveller. 
Our bodies will become 
our admission tickets as 
biometric borders expand 
their reach

 Backscatter Blueprint (Primavera), cyanotype based on an X-ray  image that reveals human cargo 
in trucks. The artist questions the imagery produced by surveillance technologies. 

A border in each of us
Other projects, such as the EU-funded 
pilot project called iBorderCtrl, add 
futuristic dimensions to mobility 
regulation. Incoming travellers are 
required to “perform a short, automated, 
non-invasive interview with an avatar 
[and] undergo a lie detector.” The data 
is then stored in large interconnected 
databases – allowing authorities 
to “calculate a cumulative risk factor for 
each individual.” 
The calculated risk factor will appear 
in any future border crossing and may 
lead to further checks, or even a denial 
of entry. The iBorderCtrl avatar 
is trained to detect human deception 
by looking for “micro-gestures.” Similar 
developments may soon be operational 
in the US, where AI-powered screening 
systems can track changes in blood 
flow or subtle eye ticks. The once-fixed 
border is thus not just shifting, but also 
multiplying and fracturing. Each person 
effectively “carries” the border with them.
These developments bear dramatic 
implications for the scope of rights 
and liberties. Treating the body as 
the site of regulation is no longer solely 
a purview of national governments. 
Major tech companies are heavily 
involved in data-mining and geolocating 
those who have tested positive for 
the virus (sometimes without consent). 
But the very same crisis has shown 
us that another future is within 
reach. In response to the pandemic, 
the Portuguese government declared 
that all immigrants already on its 
territory – including asylum seekers – 
would gain access to the same rights 
as citizens to “health, social security, 
and job and housing stability as a duty 
of a solidarity society in times of crisis.” 
Here, sharing the same risks, in the same 
place, at the same time, created 
camaraderie and community. 
When the day comes that we can better 
treat this deadly virus, we will be left 
with the task of undoing its harsh, 
exclusionary impacts.
