Zhai Yongming
Recipient of numerous international awards 
for her work, including Italy’s Ceppo Pistoia 
International Literary Prize (2012) and the 
Northern California Book Awards (2012) . 
Since her poem sequence, Woman, in 
the 1980s, the Chinese poet has published 
more than ten poetry anthologies and eight 
collections of essays . Her work has been 
translated into many languages . 
In the face of a disaster, what literature 
should try to do is neither express 
a hasty eulogium, nor rash criticism. 
Instead, it should focus on individuals. 
It should be about the true emotions felt, 
and reflections on the disaster. Human 
beings need to learn to have a reverence 
for the unknown, show respect for 
life, and keep away from prejudices 
or a dichotomous way of thinking. 
If we can achieve this, the people of the 
world may be granted more liberty 
and tolerance when the pandemic finally 
dies out.  
Starting with Woman, which I wrote 
in the 1980s, most of my poems have 
drawn inspiration from reality and from 
what goes on in society. So I hope my 
writing at the time of a pandemic is not 
a spur-of-the-moment thing, or just 
about drawing attention. I hope my work 
can be expressions of some concrete 
feelings and thoughts about this outbreak. 
As a writer, you need to present insights, 
rather than just slogans.
A special form of literary expression, poetry 
comes out of the depths of a heart that 
is deeply moved. Poems written at such 
times should be about people’s sufferings 
and resilience in the face of a disaster. 
They need to be thought-provoking. 
A poet must dedicate herself/himself 
to building a just society and protecting 
the environment. A writer is incompetent 
if she evades reality, or fails to say what she 
thinks about the world – she is then not 
playing the role that she is meant to.

A poet must dedicate 
herself to building a just 
society and protecting 
the environment  
Women’s 
writing: 
Illuminating the darkness
The world after the pandemic will be different from the one 
that we’ve always known. It will be more benevolent towards 
the unknown, and more respectful towards living species, 
predicts one of China’s best-known contemporary poets.

Écriture feminine 
as an alternative
In times of crises, women often 
demonstrate fearlessness, courage 
and engagement. During the COVID-19 
pandemic, Deng Ge, a young woman, 
organized a Contingent of Angels after 
the lockdown of Wuhan – to deliver goods 
to hospitals, care for the homeless, help 
patients find hospital beds, and provide 
free catering for medical workers, on 
a daily basis. She did this out of her own 
free will, braving great life-threatening 
hazards and pressure. Besides her, there 
are many women in Wuhan who have 
silently done their part as volunteers.
Écriture feminine, or feminine writing, 
is a relevant, not outdated, topic today. 
During the outbreak, for instance, 
Ruoshuiyin, a female poet and nurse on 
the front line, wrote poems about the true 
experience and feelings of medical 
professionals, which have been widely 
welcomed by the public. Her writing 
is irreplaceable in that her poems depict 
a character like that of a journalist on 
a battle-field, who can see for herself 
what really happened on the front line 
and present the whole picture. 
In reality, women are already playing 
their roles in public contexts or domains. 
They are in positions which demand 
greater efforts, as they take on tasks that 
are often stereotyped as the business 
of men. Women constantly have to prove 
that being female is not a drawback. 
Feminine writing is not something 
physiological, but rather a new perspective 
that does not follow the masculine 
discourse and thinking blindly. The 
feminine voice represents a different 
benchmark away from the existing 
aesthetic system, instead of simply 
filling the blanks or supplementing 
the masculine discourse.
Some women writers seem to be destined 
to truly transcend the fetters of their 
gender – which, as I see it, means that 
they fear no labelling, and are able to stay 
optimistic. Their work is like a light that 
shines through all darkness. I prefer 
to call this a “white night”, to describe 
this darkness with the ambition 
and benevolence of women.  
The pandemic has overshadowed the rosy 
prospect of a world characterized by 
security and liberty. We will have to live 
with uncertainty about the future for 
quite a long time. There may not be any 
prophet or sage who comes forth to guide 
us through. Will there be more liberty 
and tolerance in this world when we are 
finally through this?
If we are to achieve this freedom 
and tolerance, we must keep off prejudice 
or a dichotomous way of thinking, 
and forsake the habit of bashing things 
we have little or no knowledge of. 
The post-pandemic world should be less 
morbid – there should be more kindness 
towards people from other countries 
and towards other species. As the world 
constantly changes, and however hard 
the human race tries to shape the world 
with advanced technologies, Nature runs 
its own course, and we stand no chance 
of conquering it. We can only regard what 
is unknown with more reverence, and be 
kind to all species of life. 
Zhai Yongming at a farm in the ancient 
water town of Xitang, near Shanghai.
©
 Ji
e 
M
o 
