With a freer and more intimate tone than daytime broadcasts, 
night-time radio has long been the privileged place for condences 
delivered in the anonymity of the night. At a time conducive to 
imagination and solitude, these broadcasts provide listeners with 
a reassuring voice that seems to speak only to them. 
But they are now giving way to less expensive programming. 
Late-night
radio: A window on intimacy 
A voice for night 
workers
In Europe, regular night-radio broadcasts 
were introduced in the 1950s. The rst of 
its kind, Notturno dall'Italia, was created 
in Italy in 1952. It was essentially a music 
programme designed for people of the 
night – truck drivers and night watchmen, 
bakers and typographers, nurses 
and insomniacs. 
In 1955, the French radio station, Paris 
Inter, launched the show Route de nuit. 
The very recent introduction of the car 
radio, coupled with the increase in motor 
trac, made it possible to keep listeners 
company on the road, so that they did 
not fall asleep at the wheel. But very 
quickly, letters from the listeners testied 
to the success of these programmes. And 
their popularity soon spread beyond 
drivers and night workers. Insomniacs, 
night owls, students, artists and the 
elderly listened to these late-night shows. 
The transistor, which made it possible 
to individualize listening by taking one's 
own personal radio into the bedroom, 
also encouraged the development of 
more diversied programming.
The late programmes soon began to 
relay the noisy and festive sounds of 
the night – broadcasting from a bar, 
for instance. But they also created an 
intimate atmosphere of quiet discussion. 
Programmes based on true confessions 
from listeners began in the US in the 
1960s, initiated by the inuential radio 
talk show host Herb Jepko’s nationwide 
all-night show. 
In France, while Ménie Grégoire's 
afternoon programme on the private 
radio station RTL gave women the chance 
to discuss intimate subjects starting in 
1967, confessional radio shows took 
on a new dimension on the late-night 
airwaves. It began in 1975 with Ligne 
Ouverte (Open line), hosted by Gonzague 
Saint-Bris on the private radio Europe 1. 
Then, public radio France Inter started Allô 
Macha (Hello Macha) hosted by Macha 
Béranger, which ran from 1977 to 2006. 
Marine Beccarelli
“Radio is in a way humanity that speaks to 
itself, that addresses itself day and night,” 
wrote Jean Tardieu in Grandeur et faiblesse 
de la radio (The grandeur and weakness 
of radio, UNESCO, Paris, p.22), in 1969. 
In fact, this humanity the French poet 
evoked only began to speak to itself at 
night quite recently. 
In the early 1920s, when the rst radio 
stations appeared, they were only on the 
air for a few hours daily. Programming 
schedules expanded gradually to ll 
most of the day, but broadcasts stopped 
when evening came. Until the late 1930s, 
only a few nights were exceptionally 
lively on the radio – Christmas and New 
Year's Eve, in particular, when festive 
and musical programmes extended past 
the usual hours.
And yet, there may be no better moment 
to listen to the radio than during the 
hours of the night – when the listener 
is more available, more alone, and less 
distracted by external demands. In the 
dark, the sound unfolds: “it is our hearing 
that we prefer to rely on”, wrote the 
French philosopher Michaël Foessel, in 
Quand la nuit s'éteint (When the night 
is over), in the French magazine Esprit, 
No. 393 (March-April 2013, p.12).
Radio became an everyday consumer 
item in the 1950s, by when it was a 
permanent xture in most homes and 
started to take over the evenings. In the 
United States, radio stations have been 
oering night-time programmes since 
the late 1940s – designed to make those 
who are still awake, dream. In Lonesome 
Gal, an anonymous actress whispered 
sweet nothings in her predominantly 
male listeners' ears. 
Û  Radio is best listened to at night, when 
the listener is more available, more alone.
© Arnaud Brihay

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            17 
On these shows, listeners could call the 
radio station switchboard at the hour 
when loneliness became most pressing, 
and anxiety needed to be eased. This 
type of night programming gradually 
spread throughout the world, to the 
point of representing the very essence of 
night radio – a place where people could 
communicate and be listened to. Where 
they still exist, it is these talk shows that 
have lasted the longest on the air.
End of late-night radio 
monopolies
Night-time also proved to be a 
playground for exploring the night in all 
its dimensions, and for radio creativity. 
Inventive and pioneering programmes 
were launched on the after-dark airwaves, 
with an almost complete freedom of 
tone and form, in contrast to the daytime 
broadcasts. An example of this is Nuits 
magnétiques (Magnetic nights), launched 
in 1978 on the public Radio France’s 
France Culture, which mixed the personal 
revelations of celebrities with those of 
ordinary people, in an experimental 
and musical, often psychedelic, sound 
atmosphere. 
At the same time, French pirate radio 
stations also extensively used the night 
to go on the air, bypassing the state radio 
monopoly that had been established in 
1945 – in the same way as the British or 
Italian pirate stations, such as Radio Alice 
in Bologna, had.
But the glorious hours of night-time radio 
seem to be long gone. The emergence 
of twenty-four hour television in the late 
1980s contributed to the reduction of 
the importance and excitement of night-
radio programmes – which, until then, 
had a monopoly on nocturnal talk shows. 
Moreover, with the advent of the internet 
and the development of podcasts in the 
mid-2000s, it became possible to listen to 
radio on demand, disconnected from live 
real time. 
Because of budget cuts, radio 
stations have chosen to replace their 
live broadcasts after midnight with 
automated music or repeats from the 
previous day. Yet, at night, radio voices 
oered listeners a presence, keeping 
them company in a way that has not 
been replaced by the communication 
possibilities oered by the internet and 
social networks. 
The overabundance of images on 
television or online also contrasts with 
radio’s lack of images – which appeals to 
the imagination of listeners, triggering 
particularly strong sensations at night, 
and giving people the impression that the 
radio voices are speaking only to them. 
Some radio stations still provide live 
late-night broadcasts. Spain’s public 
radio network RNE’s Radio 3 invites 
listeners to explore night-related themes 
in Todos somos sospechosos. BBC Radio 
5 Live oers Up all night, in which Rhod 
Sharp and other hosts present news, 
interviews and stories from around the 
world between one a.m. and ve in the 
morning. A few web radios – and even 
an app, Call in the Night, an experimental 
radio show and telephone network which 
has listeners talking about their dreams 
– still occupy the night-time slot. After all, 
who says the night is just for sleeping?
An expert on the history of radio, 
Marine Beccarelli is the author of a 
thesis on night radio in France and a 
contributor to the public radio station, 
France Culture. 
Ý  Night radio show host 
Macha Béranger in a studio at the 
Maison de la Radio, Paris, 1999.
© Mat Jacob/Tendance Floue
