Indeed, dietary cannibalism can be 
practised on individuals who are already 
dead – as in funerary endocannibalism, 
which consists of eating a member of 
one’s own family after their death. 
Only the presence of traces on human 
bones of beheading, or injuries due 
to the impact of projectiles or blunt 
instruments causing death, can support 
the hypothesis that the consumed victims 
were violently killed. In the Palaeolithic 
era, these marks were observed in fewer 
than thirty cases. The question remains: 
did the “eaters” and the “eaten” belong to 
the same community? Although today 
the practice of cannibalism – both dietary 
and ritual – is documented at several 
Palaeolithic sites, it is often dicult to 
know whether it was an endocannibalism 
or an exocannibalism.
Absence of collective 
violence
Excluding this particular context, 
just under a dozen cases of violence 
– projectile impacts, blows to the 
head – have been identied on several 
hundred human bones dating back 
more than 12,000 years. But are these 
injuries the result of an accident, or of an 
act of violence during an interpersonal, 
intragroup or intergroup conict? 
Prehistorian Marylène Patou-Mathis 
is a research director at the French 
National Centre for Scientic 
Research (CNRS), and currently 
joint director of the UMR 7194 
Histoire Naturelle de l’Homme 
Préhistorique (HNHP, Natural 
history of prehistoric man) project, 
at the National Museum of Natural 
History in Paris.
For these early periods, the distinction is 
dicult to make. However, in many cases, 
injuries, such as those caused by a shock 
or a blow to the head, had healed. These 
persons were therefore not killed, which 
would tend to prove that their wounds 
were the result of an accident, or a quarrel 
between two people. 
In other cases, the question of the 
identity of the aggressor arises again 
– was the individual a member of the 
victim’s community or an outsider? This 
remains unanswered. In addition, the use 
of human bones in the manufacture of 
domestic objects or ornaments also raises 
the question of the conditions of death 
of the individuals whose bones they 
are. In most of these cases, it is dicult 
to conclude that the death was violent, 
because they can just as easily attest to a 
particular funeral procedure.
Archaeological data shows that a 
form of violence already existed in the 
Palaeolithic era, notably ceremonies 
involving cannibalism. But no evidence 
has been found so far of collective 
violence. In the majority of the cases 
retained and studied (outside the context 
of cannibalism), only one individual was a 
victim of violence – which may reect the 
existence of interpersonal conicts (which 
were rarely fatal) or sacricial rites. 
Our image of the wild and warlike 
prehistoric human, which persists even 
today, is actually a myth, devised in the 
second half of the nineteenth 
century. Archaeological research shows 
that, in fact, collective violence emerged 
with the sedentarization of communities 
and the transition from a predation 
economy to a production economy. 
Ý  A cave painting depicting a battle in 
the Mesolithic age, discovered in Castellón 
province, Spain. 
(Public domain)
The origins of violence
Even if today, prehistoric humans are still 
perceived in the popular imagination 
as violent beings in perpetual conict, 
were these societies really as violent as 
ours? Only archaeological remains can 
provide answers to these questions. To 
characterize a violent act, archaeologists 
study the impacts of projectiles and 
injuries on human bones, assess the state 
of preservation of the skeletons, and 
analyse the environment in which they 
were discovered. 
Currently, the most ancient traces of 
violence that have been found are 
those resulting from the practice of 
cannibalism. Marks of disarticulation, 
emaciation (the stripping of esh), 
fracturing and calcination have been 
observed on Palaeolithic human bones. 
This relatively rare practice – which 
appeared 780,000 years ago and has been 
documented in the Sierra de Atapuerca 
mountains in Spain – persisted in other 
nomadic hunter-gatherer societies of the 
Palaeolithic age, and among Neolithic 
agro-pastoralists. But this evidence of 
one human’s action on another human’s 
body raises questions: were the victims 
killed before they were eaten?  

It is therefore reasonable to assume 
that there was no war in the Palaeolithic 
period, strictly speaking. There are several 
reasons that could explain this absence – 
a small population, a suciently rich and 
diversied subsistence territory, a lack of 
resources, and a social structure that was 
egalitarian and less hierarchical. 
Among these small groups of nomadic 
hunter-gatherers, collaboration and 
mutual support among all members of 
the clan were necessary for their survival. 
In addition, a good understanding 
between them was essential to ensure 
reproduction, and therefore progeny. The 
so-called “savagery” of prehistoric humans 
is thus only a myth – devised in the second 
half of the nineteenth century and the 
early twentieth century, to reinforce the 
discourse on the progress accomplished 
since the birth of humanity and the 
concept of “civilization”. This image of 
“violent and warlike” prehistoric humans 
is the result of a scholarly construction 
popularized by artists and writers. 
The development of 
conicts
Collective violence seems to have 
appeared with the sedentarization of 
communities at the end of the Palaeolithic 
era, around 13,000 BC in the Near East; 
but, again, only one or a few individuals 
were killed. This may reect the existence 
of conicts within the group, but also the 
appearance of human sacrices. 
Two sites are exceptions to this: Site 117 
of Jebel Sahaba, on the right bank of the 
Nile on the northern border of Sudan in 
Egypt; and Nataruk, west of Lake Turkana 
in Kenya. 
In the Jebel Sahaba necropolis, dated 
between 14,340 and 13,140 years 
before the present, half of the fty-
nine skeletons (discovered in 1964) of 
men, women and children of all ages – 
In several necropolises, dated between 
about 8,000 and 6,500 years ago, the type 
of weapons used (few arrow impacts) 
and the fragments of pottery associated 
with the bodies, attest to internal or inter-
village conicts. The remains of these 
victims testify to tragic events linked to 
a crisis (demographic, of governance, 
epidemiological) or to the practice of 
rites – funerary, propitiatory, expiatory 
or foundational – with human sacrices 
sometimes followed by cannibal meals. 
However, the existence of conict 
between two groups or communities 
cannot be ruled out, as shown by certain 
paintings on the walls of rock shelters 
in Spain. Dated between 10,000 and 
6,500 before the current era (BCE), they 
represent scenes of armed encounters 
between groups of archers – scenes that 
are absent in Palaeolithic parietal art. 
The change in the economy (from 
predation to production), which led to a 
radical change in social structures very 
early on, seems to have played a major 
role in the development of conicts. 
excavated from several pits covered with 
stone slabs – had died violent deaths. 
The deaths were either a result of blows 
to the head in particular, or after their 
bodies were pierced by spearheads or 
stone projectile tips, some of which were 
found still embedded in their remains. 
Three of the men were probably lying on 
the ground when they were put to death. 
Even if the question whether all fty-nine 
bodies were buried at the same time 
remains unanswered, this site represents 
the rst proven case of collective 
violence. Was it intragroup or intergroup 
aggression? The debate remains open. 
About 10,000 years ago in Nataruk, 
twenty-seven individuals, including men, 
women and children, were probably 
thrown into a swamp. Ten of the twelve 
bodies that were perfectly preserved, 
bear lesions caused by acts of violence 
and two of these, including a pregnant 
woman, had their hands tied. First 
discovered in 2012, far from a habitat, 
this small group of hunter-gatherers 
may have been exterminated by another 
group during a sojourn away from 
their homes. 
From predation to 
production
Traces of acts of violence are more frequent 
in the Neolithic period. This period was 
marked by many changes of a dierent 
nature. They were environmental (global 
warming); economic (domestication 
of plants and animals, search for new 
territories, surplus and storage of food); 
social and societal (sedentarization, local 
population explosion, the emergence of 
an elite and castes) and, at the end of this 
period, religious (goddesses gave way to 
male divinities). 
When faced with crises, 
a community is more resilient 
if it is based on co-operation 
and mutual support, 
rather than on individualism 
and competition
Þ  From the nineteeth century, representations 
of prehistoric man have evolved over time. 
According to Marylène Patou-Mathis, 
the Neanderthal was neither superior nor 
inferior to modern man – he was just dierent.

Unlike the exploitation of resources 
in the wild, food production allowed 
the option of a food surplus, that gave 
rise to the concept of ownership – 
and, consequently, the emergence of 
inequalities. 
Very quickly, the stored commodities 
aroused envy and provoked internal 
struggles, but were also potential spoils 
in conicts between communities. As 
evidenced by the emergence in Europe 
during the Neolithic period, of gures of 
the chief and warrior (visible in rock art 
and burials), this change in economy also 
led to a hierarchical structure within agro-
pastoral societies. The emergence of an 
elite and castes included the warriors and 
as a consequence, the slaves needed to 
do the agricultural work, in particular. 
In addition, the emergence of an elite 
with its own interests and rivalries 
provoked internal power struggles and 
intercommunity conicts. It was only from 
5,500 BC, marked by the arrival of new 
migrants, that traces of conicts between 
villages became much more frequent.
Violence is not inscribed in our genes. 
Its appearance has historical and social 
causes – the concept of “primordial 
(original) violence” is a myth. War is 
therefore not inseparable from the human 
condition, but is the product of societies, 
and the cultures it generates. As the 
studies of early human societies show, 
when faced with crises, a community 
is more resilient if it is based on co-
operation and mutual support, rather 
than on individualism and competition. 
As for the reality of our ancestors’ lives, 
it probably lies somewhere between the 
two visions – both of them mythical – 
of the Hobbesian Aubes cruelles (Cruel 
dawns, a book of poems on prehistoric 
times, by the scientist and writer, 
Henri-Jacques Proumen, 1879-1962), 
and the golden age of human 
ourishing imagined by the philosopher 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
These would proliferate in the Bronze 
Age, which began before 3,000 BC. It was 
during this period, when genuine war 
weapons made out of metal appeared, 
that war became institutionalized.
The historical and social 
causes of violence
While it is dicult today to assess the true 
extent of acts of violence in prehistoric 
times – as the evaluation of the importance 
of this phenomenon is probably qualied 
by the state of ndings and studies – it 
is possible to put forward some ideas. It 
appears, on the one hand, that the number 
of prehistoric sites in which acts of violence 
have been observed is low, in relation to 
the geographical extent and duration of 
the period under consideration (several 
100,000 years). 
On the other hand, we could conclude 
that while violent behaviour towards 
others is old, war has not always existed. 
Its origins appear to be correlated with 
the development of the production 
economy, which led very early on to a 
radical change in social structures.
Þ  The reconstruction of the muscles of the head and neck of 
the Homo Neanderthalensis of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 
in the Corrèze, France. Sculpture by Joanny Durand, 1921. 
Þ  El Neandertal Emplumado, the scientic reconstruction 
of the face of a Neanderthal who lived some 50,000 years ago. 
Sculpture by Italian scientist Fabio Fogliazza.
