Forgotten history
Today, there is a growing body of 
historical research exploring this subject. 
Studies examining specic national 
contexts – from Argentina, Australia, 
Germany, Sweden, Turkey, the United 
Kingdom and the United States, for 
instance – have written women and 
gender back into broadcasting history. 
They have uncovered marginalized 
and often “hidden” histories of women 
in broadcasting, whose lives and work 
have been forgotten or ignored. They 
have recorded key developments in 
women’s programming, including 
changing denitions of the contested 
term, “women’s interest”, and highlighted 
debates on women’s voices – both on and 
o the air. Together, these histories point 
to the role of radio in the lives of women 
and how this relationship has contributed 
to processes of democratization and 
modernization.
In a sound environment that has long been dominated 
by men, women have been slow to carve out a place 
for themselves. Yet, having been assiduous listeners 
from the start, they have played a central role in shaping 
the history and content of radio. 
Women and radio:
On the same wavelength
Women have played a key role – both 
as broadcasters and listeners – in 
shaping radio’s general development 
and broadcasting practices. Programme 
formats and genres we now take for 
granted, such as serials and talk shows, 
were conceived for a female audience. In 
the US, in the 1930s, for example, where 
commercial radio dominated, women 
played an important role as consumers 
and became a target group for advertisers 
and sponsors. 
Daytime broadcasts came to be 
characterized as “feminine” and soon, 
radio soaps dominated the airwaves 
because they were so lucrative. 
Michele Hilmes, Professor of Media and 
Cultural Studies at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison and an expert on 
US broadcasting, has suggested that the 
gendered nature of daytime radio serials 
soon meant they oered a space for 
women. In her 1997 book, Radio Voices: 
American Broadcasting, 1922-1952, Hilmes 
writes that “under cover of daytime”, radio 
serials addressed and confronted issues 
and concerns facing American women in 
the 1930s and 1940s. 
A similar trend can be observed in the 
magazine-style format. Woman’s Hour, 
introduced on BBC Radio in 1946, was 
the rst dedicated radio programme for 
women in the UK. Topics such as “keeping 
house” and “childcare” were soon replaced 
by dicult issues facing women, such 
as politics and women’s citizenship. 
And quite early on, sensitive topics and 
taboos such as menopause and intimate 
relationships in marriage, were addressed. 
Kristin Skoog 
In September 2019, the British 
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) reported 
the story of Sediqa Sherzai on its website. 
Based in the city of Kunduz in northern 
Afghanistan, Sherzai set up Radio Roshani 
in 2008. Run by women and promoting 
women’s rights, the station continues 
broadcasting today, in spite of death 
threats and other war-related challenges. 
Its phone-in programmes provide an 
important space and public platform 
for women’s voices and concerns. Radio 
Roshani is a powerful example of the 
strong relationship between women and 
radio today.
Since the 1920s, when radio was 
introduced into people’s homes, the 
medium has provided a space for women 
to be heard – literally and guratively 
– in a largely male-dominated public 
soundscape. Radio bridged, connected, 
and blurred the boundaries between 
the private and public spheres and by 
doing so, spoke to women as housewives, 
workers, consumers and citizens. In many 
countries, the emergence of radio in 
the home also coincided with women 
gaining the vote. 
FRANCE
Presence of women on radio (2018):
Source: Conseil supérieur
de l’audiovisuel, 2019.
37%
experts37%
political guests23%
journalists39%

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            21 
Reporters and pioneers
Women have also contributed to the 
development of new formats, such as 
the social documentary. The British 
radio producer and broadcaster Olive 
Shapley (1910-1999), is an example of 
this. Her career began at the BBC in 1934, 
where she produced the Children’s Hour 
programme for the BBC’s North region, 
based in Manchester. 
The depression in the 1930s had plunged 
many areas of Britain into poverty – this 
was particularly visible in and around 
Manchester. Shapley made good use of 
mobile recording vans that enabled her 
to travel across the region to interview 
people in their homes, on the street, 
or at work. Her documentaries were 
pioneering, both in technique and 
subject matter. Her aim, she said later, 
was to get “real people talking”. 
Not long before the outbreak of the 
Second World War, Shapley produced 
a programme called Miners’ Wives, that 
explored the way of life in two mining 
villages – one in County Durham in the 
north-east of England, and another near 
Béthune, France. The programme was 
later translated and rebroadcast on the 
BBC’s French service during the war.
It was also during the Second 
World War that the rst women war 
correspondents emerged. American 
radio journalist Betty Wason (1912-2001) 
rst travelled to Europe for the 
Transradio Press Service, a wire service 
that provided the news to radio stations. 
She was in Prague in 1938 when the 
Nazis took over the government, and 
reported on events there. 
The idea that radio could bring women 
together across national boundaries 
gained currency after the war. Women 
were the driving force behind the 
creation of the International Association 
of Women in Radio in 1951 (a T for 
Television was added in 1957). The IAWRT, 
which still exists, was founded to promote 
peace by bringing women broadcasters 
together to share ideas and information. 
It was initiated by the Dutch feminist, 
economic historian and radio broadcaster 
Willemijn (Lilian) Hendrika Posthumus-
van der Goot (1897-1989). Today the 
organization is a global network with 
members from fty-four countries – 
focusing on gender equality, and working 
to enhance the role of women in media 
and communications.
Feminism and radio
The evolution of women’s radio 
programming has often been closely 
associated with the feminist movement. 
In the late 1940s and 1950s, for example, 
Woman’s Hour was connected with 
several women’s groups in Britain. In its 
early days, the IAWRT was also strongly 
linked to the international women’s 
movement through the International 
Council of Women (ICW). 
These early examples may not have 
identied themselves as “feminist”, 
although in many ways they clearly 
were. World Radio Day in 2014 
celebrated women in radio and women’s 
empowerment, but also noted that 
gender equality remained a challenge in 
the media industry. 
Wason was then hired by the Columbia 
Broadcasting System (now CBS) and was 
soon reporting on the Nazi invasion in 
Norway. She was later based in Greece. 
However, the pioneering reporter was 
told to get a man to read her reports 
on air. At the time, it was thought that 
women’s voices were not suitable for 
serious reporting. “They said women 
weren’t authoritative enough or 
suciently knowledgeable to handle 
serious subjects,” she later recalled. 
Another radio pioneer was Audrey 
Russell (1906-1989). The BBC’s rst 
woman war correspondent, she 
contributed war reports and interviews 
between 1941 and 1945. Russell focused 
on the experiences of civilians during 
the war, such as the impact of German 
long-range shelling over Dover and 
Folkestone, and the destruction of a 
V-2 rocket. However, being a woman 
prevented her from reporting from 
the battlefront – that was reserved 
for her male counterparts. In spite of 
the obstacles they faced, Wason and 
Russell were both signicant voices that 
challenged a space dominated by males. 
During the Second World War, women’s 
radio programming played an important 
role in mobilizing morale on the home 
front, but was also used as a vehicle 
for propaganda abroad. For instance, 
US radio propaganda programmes 
were devised to target listeners in Latin 
America – whose resources, such as 
rubber and petroleum, were crucial to 
the US war eort – to maintain good 
relations with the people and combat 
Nazi propaganda there. Research shows 
that Latin American women listeners 
were particularly targeted because 
they were perceived as being central to 
family values. 
Since the 
1920s, radio 
has provided 
a space for 
women to be 
heard – literally 
and figuratively UNITED KINGDOM
Number of women working in radio: 
Source: Ofcom 2019.
51% Women in senior positions: 
36%

There are several examples, though, of 
women’s activism on radio, with a clear 
feminist agenda. Norway’s radiOrakel, 
which claims it is the rst feminist 
radio station in the world, was set up 
in October 1982 in Oslo – it is available 
today via FM and internet streaming. 
Its mission is to train women in areas 
including radio journalism and sound 
engineering. The station actively supports 
women as both interviewers and 
interviewees. It also stipulates that at least 
half the music aired must be composed 
or performed by women. 
Community radio stations also provide an 
important space for the empowerment 
of women. Often described as a 
“third” model of radio, since it oers an 
alternative to public and commercial 
broadcasting, community radio is 
generally not for prot. It is operated 
by volunteers and serves specic local 
communities that are often neglected 
by the mainstream media. As Caroline 
Mitchell, Associate Professor, Radio 
and Participation, at the University of 
Sunderland in the UK and co-founder 
of Fem FM, the UK’s rst radio station 
for women, established in 1992, has 
observed, community radio oers 
“a space for women’s representation, 
participation and resistance.”
This reinterpretation of the role played 
by women broadcasters and listeners 
sheds new light on the history of radio. 
Leaving aside the obvious dierences 
between Radio Roshani in Afghanistan 
in 2019, series broadcasts in the US in 
the 1930s, or radiOrakel in Norway today, 
these examples are a clear indication that 
the medium has, from early on, been a 
powerful platform for women’s voices.
Senior Lecturer in Media History at 
Bournemouth University in the United 
Kingdom, Kristin Skoog is a co-founder 
of the Women’s Radio in Europe Network 
(WREN). Her research is centred on radio 
and media history, and the history of 
women’s radio and women broadcasters.
Women have played a key role 
– both as broadcasters and listeners – 
in shaping radio’s general development 
and broadcasting practices 
