Powerful women 
Photos:  Nadia Ferroukhi      Text: Katerina Markelova
Naliapou, the doyenne 
of Tumai, a Kenyan 
village forbidden to 
men, prepares for a 
chanting ceremony to 
the spirits, by coating 
her face with red earth 
mixed with animal fat.
In 2009, photographer Nadia Ferroukhi was on an 
assignment in Kenya. As she stepped out of the 
bus, which had stopped in the middle of the bush, 
she recognized Mohammed, who had served as a 
guide in a television documentary about Umoja, a 
village forbidden to men. 
Established in 1991 by women of the Samburu 
ethnic group, this village – near Mount Kenya, 
some 300 kilometres from Nairobi – provides a 
home to women who are divorced, rejected or 
beaten by their husbands. This subject aroused 
her curiosity to such an extent that she decided to 
track down these women, who lived in exile from 
their own environments. 
Born in Paris and raised alongside a feminist 
sister, the Czech-Algerian photographer has long 
been interested in strong women who occupy 
prominent places in their communities. “As a 
woman, it’s natural to be interested in the plight of 
women,” she explains. “As a photographer, you can 
express some of what they are going through.”
After this chance meeting, Mohammed became 
Ferroukhi’s guide. He accompanied her in her work 
with the women of Umoja. But not for long. The 
village had become a tourist attraction because of 
the media exposure. So Rebecca, the village chief, 
allowed Ferroukhi only three days to complete 
her assignment, at specied times and for a fee. 
“As a photographer, it’s important to be present 
as much as possible, so that you are forgotten and 
can capture the moment, the light. You can’t follow 
oce hours,” she noted, adding that she refused to 
comply with the conditions imposed.
Her guide then took her to Tumai, another women-
only village. It was founded by Chili, who had 
originally lived in Umoja. “There, I was welcomed 
like a princess, with dances. I was the rst person to 
report on this village,” Ferroukhi said. 
The inhabitants of Tumai are completely self-
sucient. These “lionesses of the bush”, as they 
are known locally – with a touch of irony and a 
lot of respect – rear their own goats and perform 
sacred rituals and other tasks usually undertaken 
by men, such as building huts and hunting. 
The practice of excision is prohibited here. All 
important decisions are taken by a majority vote.  
Only women who are divorced are allowed to live 
here. Boys are permitted, but only until they are 16, 
after which they must leave. 
Other women-only villages have been created 
along the lines of Umoja and Tumai. “Living 
conditions are dicult, but for these women, 
it is the price of freedom,” says Ferroukhi. The 
photographer has visited nine other countries 
where women play a central role in societies – 
economically, socially, and sometimes, politically. 
Through her reading, travels, and above all, 
her meeting with the French ethnologist, 
anthropologist and feminist Françoise Héritier 
(1933-2017), Ferroukhi became interested in the 
much-discussed notion of matriarchy. Her series In 
the Name of Mother came from this research. 
What indigenous matriarchal societies have in 
common is that they are true gender-egalitarian 
societies – as described by the German matriarchy 
scholar Heide Goettner-Abendroth in her book, 
Matriarchal Societies: Studies on Indigenous Cultures 
Across the Globe. Some of these societies are 
secular, horizontal, non-hierarchical, and essentially 
agrarian. The children are related primarily to their 
mother. They bear her name and live mainly in her 
clan house, even when they have become adults. 
The inheritance of property and goods is from 
mother to daughter. 
Ferroukhi has lived among the Tuareg of Algeria, 
the Mosuo in China, the Navajo in the United 
States, and the Minangkabau of Indonesia. 
She has also lived with the inhabitants of the 
island of Grande Comore in Comoros, the 
island of Canhabaque in Guinea-Bissau, and 
the town of Juchitán in Mexico. The photos 
here are accompanied by texts written by 
the photographer, in which she details the 
particularities of each community. 
Portraying matriarchy is a challenge. “People 
often expect a spectacular result. But in fact, I 
photograph everyday life,” Ferroukhi insists. The 
daily life of societies which, far from clichés, base 
their social organization, as Goettner-Abendroth 
puts it, “on the equal value of each member.” 
This photo reportage marks the celebration of 
International Women’s Day on 8 March. 

The island of Ushant (Ouessant in 
French) is located at the extreme tip 
of Brittany, in France. It harbours 
a social curiosity – since the 
seventeenth century, the island’s 
male population has left massively 
to join the navy, particularly the 
merchant navy. Until recently, 
the men left Ushant for months, 
even years, at a time, leaving the 
material and social organization of 
the island to the women. 
France, 2012
These Native American Navajo 
women work in a coal mine, 
ensuring their complete 
nancial independence.
Married to a 
long-distance sailor, 
Jeanne ran the family 
farm on the French 
island of Ushant – 
known as the island at 
the end of the world – 
all by herself.

The social life of the Navajo nation is organized 
around women, according to a matrilineal 
system in which titles, names and property are 
transmitted through female lineage. When a 
Navajo girl reaches puberty, she must go through 
the Kinaaldá, a four-day ceremony which marks 
her passage from childhood to womanhood. 
This ceremony is linked to the Navajo myth of 
Changing Woman, the rst woman on earth who 
was able to bear children. On the reservation, 
women are generally more active than men. 
It is not uncommon for them to resume their 
education late in life, even after having children.
United States of America, 2011
In the foothills of the Himalayas, between the 
provinces of Yunnan and Sichuan in southwest 
China, the Mosuo community is organized on 
matrilineal lines. It is the woman who bears the 
family name and holds the reins of the household. 
Heritage is passed down from mother to daughter. 
Love relationships are lived without a marriage 
contract or moral constraints – at the sole rhythm 
of the feelings and the will of the women. The rules 
require the man leave his lover’s room before dawn 
– this is the custom of the zouhun, or “walking 
marriages”. The man does not assume the status 
of father. But he can play the role of uncle and help 
his sister raise her children. 
China, 2009
The Dabu, the matriarch who 
heads the Mosuo family. This key 
role is held by the oldest woman 
in her lineage. A proud guardian 
of tradition, she passes on the 
name and property, manages 
the money and organizes 
religious ceremonies.

Comorian society is steeped in Bantu 
African matriarchal traditions and 
the Islamic religion. Every individual 
is born and lives at their mother’s, 
aunt’s or grandmother’s home, 
following the maternal line. It is the 
woman who inherits and owns the 
mania houli heritage – particularly 
the house, built by her father or 
maternal uncle on the family land. 
The traditional anda or Grand 
Marriage, which is more widespread 
on Grande Comore than on the other 
three islands – Anjouan, Mohéli 
and Mayotte – is a prerequisite for 
anyone who wishes to rise in the 
Comorian social hierarchy.
Comoros, 2017
A young bride on the 
island of Grande Comore. 
After the wedding, the 
husband moves into her 
house built by her family, 
where he is considered 
a guest of the matriclan. 
The women in Juchitán, 
a city in southern Mexico, 
play a major social and 
economic role, enjoying 
a rare independence in 
this patriarchal society. 

Juchitán, a town of 78,000 inhabitants in the Mexican state of Oaxaca 
is the birthplace of painter Frida Kahlo’s mother. Over the centuries, 
men and women here have developed clearly identied forms of 
autonomy. Women manage commerce, the organization of festivals, 
the house, and the street. Agriculture, shing and politics are the 
responsibility of men. This is one of the few places in Mexico where 
the Zapotec language is still spoken. Used in exchanges between 
female neighbours and passers-by, this language has enabled the 
development of a remarkable solidarity between women. The name, 
the house and the heritage are passed down through the women. 
The birth of a daughter is therefore a great source of joy. 
Mexico, 2011

The way of life in the archipelago, particularly on the island of Canhabaque 
(population 3,500), has barely been inuenced by modern civilization, if 
at all. Here, houses are owned by the women, and it is the men who move 
in with their wives. Although the father passes on his family name to his 
children, it is the mother who chooses the rst name – and it is to her clan 
that they are related. The island is ruled by a queen. There is also a king (who 
is not the queen’s husband), but his role is limited – he is simply a spokesman. 
Each village is governed by a council of women, elected for a lifelong term. 
Guinea-Bissau, 2011
Two young girls defunto. This is the name 
given to young girls who must go through 
all the stages of female initiation, on the 
island of Canhabaque, Guinea-Bissau.

Today, Kihnu, a tiny Estonian 
island in the Baltic sea, has some 
500 inhabitants, compared to 7,000 
during the Soviet era. Traditionally, 
when the men went to sea, the women 
took on their tasks, such as working 
in the elds. Since the mid-nineteenth 
century, the women of Kihnu have 
taken over, managing the aairs of the 
community. Although men make up 
roughly half the population of the island 
today, it is still their mothers, wives 
and daughters who are responsible for 
education, culture, community life and 
craft traditions. Kihnu is often referred 
to as the Isle of Women in tourist guides. 
This simplistic image is not to the liking 
of those concerned, though. The women 
acknowledge that they play a leading 
role in decision-making, but in a society 
where men’s incomes remain the basis 
of household nances. 
Estonia, 2019
Celebrated folk singer Virve Köster (born 
1928) is the guardian of the centuries-old 
cultural traditions of Kihnu, which are 
expressed in song, dance and craftsmanship. 
These traditions were inscribed on UNESCO's 
Representative List of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage in 2008.
The women of Kihnu choose their 
skirts according to tradition and 
their moods – the darkest skirts are 
worn on sad days, the brightest on 
happy days.


The Tuareg woman does not wear a veil – the man does. 
She has complete freedom to choose her husband. 
She knows the tinagh alphabet, the tales and legends, 
and teaches them to her children. The tent and its contents 
belong to her. She manages and supervises the camp when 
the man is away, and participates in all decision-making, 
even when he is present. She is involved in all social, 
cultural and economic matters. It is through the maternal 
lineage that all aristocratic powers are transmitted. But 
the policies of sedentarization in the 1970s and 1980s, 
repeated droughts, and the attractions of modernity for 
young people have undermined this way of life. 
Algeria, 2019


The world’s largest matrilineal 
society, the Minangkabau, inhabit 
the highlands of the west coast of 
Sumatra in Indonesia. According to 
their social system, all hereditary 
property is passed on from mother 
to daughter. The biological father 
is not the child’s guardian; it is 
the mamak, the uncle, who plays 
that role. During the marriage 
ceremony, the wife goes to pick 
up her husband at his home, 
accompanied by the women of 
her family. The adat, or customary 
law, determines a set of unwritten, 
traditional rules on matrimonial 
and property matters. Under these 
rules, in the event of a divorce, the 
husband must leave the home, and 
the woman retains custody of the 
children and the house. 
Indonesia, 2011
In the event of a break-up or death, 
the Targuia – a Tuareg woman – 
leaves the nomadic camp with her 
children, her dowry, the tent, and even 
the camels left to her by her father. 
Among the Minangkabau of Indonesia, it 
is the mamak – the eldest of the maternal 
uncles – not the father, who is the head of 
the matrilineal lineage. 
