Karina Batthyány
Executive Secretary of the Latin American 
Council of Social Sciences (CLACSO) 
and Professor of Sociology, Universidad de la 
República, Montevideo, Uruguay .
The coronavirus pandemic has 
had an unprecedented impact on 
the lives of people in Latin America 
and the Caribbean (LAC). The 
repercussions are particularly severe 
for low-income households. The health 
emergency declared in response 
to COVID-19 completely disrupted 
everyday life, like in most countries around 
the world. 
The magnitude of the crisis in the region 
has reopened debates on the role of the 
state, politics in general, and public policies 
in particular. While some predict the end 
of humanity, others argue that nothing 
will change. What is certain, though, 
is that we are in a phase of transition 
– our societies, in some aspects, will 
undergo reconfigurations in the short 
and medium term.
Forecasts by the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean (ECLAC) predict 
a 5.3 per cent fall in regional gross 
domestic product (GDP) by 2020 – 
the worst recession in the region in the last 
100 years. Unemployment is also projected 
to rise by 12 million, in an area where fifty-
three per cent of jobs are in the informal 
economy. This is particularly serious, 
given that few countries in the region 
offer unemployment benefits. In 2019, 
only Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, 
Ecuador, and Uruguay had unemployment 
insurance for workers in the formal sector.
The poorest  
are hardest hit
Given the economic and social inequalities 
in the region, the consequences 
of unemployment will disproportionately 
affect the poor and vulnerable layers of the 
middle-income population. Women will 
also be impacted more severely.
The crisis is also likely to result in an 
increase in informal jobs, as poorer 
families are forced to send their children 
to work, in order to survive. This will lead 
to an increase in child labour. Poverty 
is projected to increase by 3.5 percentage 
points, while extreme poverty is set 
to grow by 2.3 percentage points (ECLAC, 
2020).
The collapse of health systems in many 
countries also emphasizes the need 
to move towards the consolidation 
of a universal health system – that 
guarantees quality and has the necessary 
resources to cope in times of crises. 
It should also take a comprehensive 
approach to health, accounting for 
the socio-economic situation of people 
and their quality of life.
The current economic model has 
generated inequalities and a high 
concentration of wealth. And in 
the absence of a universal welfare state, 
access to social benefits remains a 
privilege in the region. This was already 
a major problem before the pandemic, 
but it is now a question of survival. It is 
therefore essential, in the medium term, 
to rethink economic, social and labour 
policies, and to promote decent work and 
the universal fulfilment of social rights. 
Latin America:  
Towards a new social pact 
Declining incomes, school drop-outs, the growth of informal work, 
and steep rises in unemployment. The social consequences of the health 
crisis for the inhabitants of the Latin America and the Caribbean region 
have been massive. The author calls for the establishment of a fairer 
and more supportive social system to avoid a deepening of inequalities. 
 Red flags appear at windows 
in working-class neighbourhoods 
in Bogota, Colombia, signalling 
to the government that families do 
not have enough to eat, April 2020.

A basic income
The current context opens the way for 
a debate on the need for a minimum 
basic income in the region. This should 
be based on the premise that access 
to essential goods is a necessary condition 
for the existence of a democratic 
citizenship, which guarantees the dignity 
of all. The LAC is the most unequal region 
in the world, and this health crisis is likely 
to accentuate these inequalities even 
further.
Finally, it is important to analyse 
the impact of the health emergency on 
gender inequalities. A central dimension 
of this is in the area of care – of children 
and the elderly – which can be seen as 
an expression of the division of labour 
between the sexes.
While lockdowns have proven to be 
effective to combat COVID-19, they have 
disrupted the dynamics of employment, 
domestic life and the way we care 
for children and the elderly. Workers 
in the informal sector, women and children 
have been especially affected. The 
containment has had a disproportionate 
effect on women’s lives, as they are mostly 
responsible for domestic and care work 
– tasks that contribute to the sustenance 
of households, and have historically 
enabled the world to function.
 A street vendor in Lima, Peru, hawking ceviche, a local 
seafood dish marinated in lime juice and served cold, 2016. 
The current economic model 
has generated inequalities 
and a high concentration 
of wealth 

Women more vulnerable
According to figures from the International 
Labour Organization (ILO), 126 million 
women work in the informal sector 
in the LAC. That accounts for about half 
of the region’s female population. Informal 
work is synonymous with job insecurity, 
low incomes, and a lack of  basic protection 
mechanisms, particularly in a crisis like 
the current one. 
The levels of informal employment 
are extremely high in many countries 
in the region. In Bolivia, Guatemala 
and Peru, eighty-three per cent of women 
have informal jobs with no  social security 
cover or protection under labour laws. 
Nearly forty per cent of working women 
in the LAC are employed in the retail, 
catering, hotel and domestic sectors. 
These are the most affected and the least 
protected jobs in the context of the current 
crisis.
As a result, a large proportion of Latin 
American women have lost their incomes 
in these difficult times, making their 
situation even more precarious. This could 
further widen the economic gap between 
women and men. For every 100 men living 
in extreme poverty in Latin America today, 
there are 132 women.
A new “social pact”
The lockdowns in the region have also 
resulted in an escalation of gender-based 
violence. We know that even in “normal” 
times, financial insecurity and social 
instability contribute to domestic 
violence. Social distancing and stay-at-
home messaging was promoted under 
the premise that the home is a safe place 
for people to shield from the pandemic. 
But this was not the case for many 
women and children.
Faced with these challenges, there 
is a need to ultimately build a new 
“social pact” – based on the recognition 
of solidarity and interdependence 
as fundamental values for 
the establishment of a fairer social 
system in the LAC. This crisis has 
highlighted the consequences of the 
commodification of public and common 
resources on our lives. The pandemic has 
clearly demonstrated that states are not 
dead yet, and that they have a central role 
to play in the implementation of policies 
that are capable of effectively transforming 
everyday lives.
These public policies must address 
the continually-deferred challenge 
of building universal systems of protection. 
They should be focused on people rather 
than the market, and put life and health 
care at the centre. To meet this challenge, 
the state – and especially the social state – 
has a major role to play, as does the need 
for greater regional and international 
collaboration and co-operation.
Women 
account 
for half 
the region’s 
informal 
workers
 A girl participating in a performance by women of all ages 
in Chile, in a protest to mark the International Day for the Elimination 
of Violence against Women, 25 November 2019.
