Katerina Markelova
UNESCO

The closure of schools and universities around 
the world to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 
pandemic, caused a major education crisis that 
reached its peak in mid-April 2020. Between 
16 and 19 April, schools shut down in more 
than 190 countries, affecting 1.57 billion children 
and young people – over ninety per cent of all 
learners. Throughout the health crisis, UNESCO 
monitored the situation globally, by publishing a map 
of school closures on its website.
The choice of digital distance education – to which 
the vast majority of countries have turned, to ensure 
educational continuity – has made the problem 
of the digital divide even more evident. Some 
826 million – half the world’s pupils and students – 
do not have computers at home and 706 million  
(forty-three per cent) are not connected 
to the internet. The lack of connectivity is of particular 
concern in sub-Saharan Africa, where the proportion 
of young people without internet access at home 
is as high as eighty per cent.
According to a recent UNESCO survey on measures 
taken by fifty-nine countries to mitigate the impact 
of school closures, only fifty-eight per cent of low-
income countries have e-learning platforms. Sixty-
four per cent of teachers in countries that responded 
to the survey (regardless of income level) do not have 
sufficient digital skills to deliver online education 
effectively. This is also the case for eighty per cent 
of parents and forty-eight per cent of students.
MAPPING THE WORLD examines some 
of the initiatives to expand connectivity, taken 
within the framework of the Global Education 
Coalition, launched by UNESCO on 26 March 2020. 
Over 100 institutions from the public and private 
sectors have pooled their expertise to offer quick, 
free and appropriate solutions to countries that lack 
the technology, content, or skills needed for distance 
learning.
Education: 
An unprecedented crisis
 A deserted classroom at the Official 
Rural Mixed School in the Los Mixcos village 
of Palencia in Guatemala, April 2020. 

This map shows the full extent of school closures around the world at the height 
of the crisis (as of 17 April 2020). It also shows some of the actions taken by 
members of the Global Education Coalition in support of distance education. 
Localized Country-wide Open
In Gabon, 
UNESCO 
trained sixty primary 
and secondary school 
educational supervisors to 
design online courses. Courses 
produced within the framework 
of the Train My Generation: Gabon 
5000 project have also been made 
available to the government.
In Lebanon, UNESCO 
and Education 
Cannot Wait, with 
the support of the French government, 
provided the Ministry of Education 
and Higher Education with online 
learning content for teachers 
and students. Almost 300 video 
courses in mathematics, science, 
and French, provided by France’s 
Réseau Canopé, are available 
on the online platform 
launched by the Ministry.
In Samoa, telecommunications 
company Vodafone 
provided around 80,000 learners 
with a free student SIM card 
that includes unlimited access 
to 4G data on a range of approved 
educational websites.
UNESCO and several coalition 
partners – including Moodle, 
Khan Academy, and Lark 
– have organized online training for 
teachers to develop the skills needed 
to implement online courses in five Pacific 
Island states: Kiribati, Nauru, Papua 
New Guinea, Samoa and Tonga.
PEAK OF SCHOOL CLOSURES  
and COALITION RESPONSES

 1,576,873,546 learners affected
 90.1% of all learners
 190 closures at the national level
The figures correspond to the number of learners enrolled in pre-primary, primary, lower secondary and upper  
secondary education [International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) levels 0 to 3], and in tertiary education 
[ISCED levels 5 to 8]. Enrolment figures are based on the latest data from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS).( (
The mobile operator Orange 
provided free internet access to digital 
educational content in sub-Saharan Africa: 
Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mali, Democratic 
Republic of Congo; and in Arab States: 
Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia.
