Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            7 
Podcasts:
Radio reinvented 
A new way to use 
the power of the voice 
Two developments – one technological, 
the other, cultural – helped transform the 
podcast market into a global industry. In 
2012, Apple embedded a podcast app in 
its smartphones, which provided a library 
system that proved popular with listeners. 
A seismic cultural shift that introduced 
millions to the podcast format occurred 
in 2014, when an independent New 
York-based radio team packaged Serial, a 
podcast of online investigative journalism 
as gripping episodic narrative. 
Serial’s rst season oered a true story 
that grabbed its audience and hooked 
them onto the weekly podcast format. 
It told the story of Adnan Syed, who 
was convicted for the murder of his ex-
girlfriend and high-school classmate, 
Hae Min Lee, in Baltimore, US in 1999. 
Syed was found guilty by a Baltimore 
County jury in 2000, when he was 18, and 
continues to serve a life sentence. 
But the podcast host, Sarah Koenig, 
who interviewed him extensively over 
a prison payphone for the show, raised 
doubts about his conviction. Over twelve 
episodes, Koenig painstakingly combed 
through the evidence, interviewing 
many of those who were associated with 
the case. 
Koenig – who received numerous awards, 
including the rst-ever Peabody Award 
for a podcast – had stumbled onto a 
new way of leveraging the power of 
voice. Although grounded in regular 
audio journalism, Serial’s style was unlike 
anything heard on radio before. Firstly, 
she spoke to listeners as if they were 
companions in her quest for the truth, 
spawning lively debates on social media 
networks. Serial became an instant hit, 
clocking up ve million downloads in 
the rst month.
By developing new forms of sound narratives, podcasting has 
done more than breathe new life into radio. In just a few years, 
it has evolved into a global industry – reinventing the audio 
medium and allowing closer links to be forged with listeners. 
Siobhan McHugh
More than any other means of 
communication, radio has the ability 
to create an atmosphere of intimacy 
with the listener. As early as in the 
1930s, United States President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt harnessed this capability, 
delivering “reside chats”, a series of 
evening radio addresses to the nation 
over the wireless (from 1933 to 1944). But 
in recent years, the growth of podcasting 
has dialled up radio’s incredible qualities 
to maximum volume. 
There are two reasons for this. People 
usually listen privately, often through 
headphones, which allows hosts to 
speak to them directly into their ears. 
That sets up the perfect conditions 
for a host-listener bond. Unlike radio, 
where presenters are ghting the 
listener’s random switch-on and ability 
to change stations with the ick of a 
dial, the podcast host can trust that the 
listener wants to listen in. This allows 
hosts to relax and be authentic, which 
increases their relatability. Some listeners 
say nding a new favourite podcast is 
like making a new friend – with over 
700,000 podcasts on US media giant 
Apple’s iTunes, the largest podcast 
platform, that’s a lot of friends.
Podcasting began simply enough in 
2004 as a technological innovation, 
mostly used by radio stations to time-
shift shows. They could be posted on 
the internet, to be downloaded at the 
listener's convenience. The name podcast 
reected that. Inadvertently coined 
by British technology journalist and 
broadcaster Ben Hammersley, it was an 
amalgam of the words iPod (the portable 
device created by Apple that allows users 
to download audio les) and broadcast.
© Océane Juvin

Serial’s popularity triggered a podcasting 
boom as media organizations scrambled 
to emulate its success. Countless true 
crime podcasts followed. The best, such 
as In The Dark, delivered engaging crafted 
storytelling, and sometimes exposed 
miscarriages of justice.
Pop culture, frivolity, 
and the news 
Since then, the podcast genre has grown, 
taking on multiple formats. The chatcast 
genre, in which hosts make short, incisive 
comments on a theme, gained popularity. 
Inexpensive to make, the genre just needs 
a host with a good audience rapport 
and a distinctive theme that will attract 
listeners. Topics can be frivolous too. There 
are chatcasts for women, such as Call Your 
Girlfriend, a frank and often funny show 
“for long-distance besties everywhere”. 
The Podfathers, a humorous take on 
fatherhood, is aimed primarily at men. 
One common format has journalists 
breaking down the news of the week, but 
in a deliberately casual way. Listeners are 
made to feel like insiders on shows such 
as the online magazine Slate’s Political 
Gabfest in the US. In France, Le Nouvel 
Esprit Public has a similar approach, but its 
guests are public intellectuals moderated 
by veteran journalist Philippe Meyer – 
who started the podcast after his radio 
show was terminated.
Pop culture podcasts have proliferated, 
such as Eyes on Gilead, an Australian 
podcast about the hit television show, 
A Handmaid’s Tale. 
Interview shows also translate well to 
podcasting: a hugely popular example 
is The Joe Rogan Show, in which the 
American comedian interviews a raft 
of celebrities.
The press was quick to notice the 
potential of podcasting to extend its 
reach. In 2017, The New York Times 
launched The Daily, a narrative news 
digest billed as “How the news 
should sound”. Hosted by the 
Times political journalist Michael 
Barbaro, its formula is simple. 
Choosing one or two big stories 
of the day, it mines the expertise 
of the daily’s 1,300 journalists to 
deliver an informed take on the 
news. The style of the podcast 
is casual and personalized, 
coupled with creative 
audio production. 
The results were immediate: young 
people subscribed to the free podcast 
in droves. In two years, The Daily was 
getting two million downloads per show. 
In September 2019, it reached a new 
milestone: an astonishing one billion 
downloads overall.
Although the US and the English-
speaking world have dominated 
the podcasting market in the last 
ve years, that looks set to change. 
In March 2019, Voxnest, an audio 
technology company, reported that 
the highest growth in podcast listeners 
was in Latin America, particularly in 
Chile, Argentina, Peru and Mexico. 
This is mirrored by the success of 
Radio Ambulante (see p.10), the 
biggest Spanish-language narrative 
journalism podcast in the world. It 
also produces an English-language 
version, hosted on NPR (National 
Public Radio) in the US. 
In India, podcasting is expanding rapidly, 
via networks such as IVM Podcasts. 
The India Explained Podcast promises 
“a refreshingly real take on all things 
Indian”, and is hugely popular. The Middle 
East has around 400 podcasts. The edgy 
Eib (shame in Arabic), a podcast from 
Amman, Jordan, examines the lives of 
ordinary people and social, cultural and 
religious taboos. 
China tends to follow a dierent 
audio-listening model, where people 
pay a modest amount for educational 
“knowledge” programmes, or follow 
interactive audio platforms such as 
Himalaya, whose 600 million users get to 
sing songs and talk about family, or listen 
to audio books. Inspired by American 
programmes such as This American Life, 
Gushi FM features stories told by ordinary 
Chinese people of various backgrounds.
Unlike radio, where presenters 
are fighting the listener’s 
ability to change stations 
with the flick of a dial, 
the podcast host can trust that 
the listener wants to listen in

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            9 
Podcasting has a powerful potential 
role as a tool of inclusion. To make an 
engaging podcast, you do need to know 
the nuts and bolts of audio production 
and to understand how audio works as a 
medium. Once this knowledge has been 
acquired, almost anyone can create a 
podcast. This allows marginalized voices 
– people from political or religious 
minorities, the LGBQTI community, the 
disabled, the elderly and others – to 
be heard. 
Community groups, non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), activists, and 
institutions of all kinds are now devising 
podcasts. For example, the Cancer 
Council of Australia podcast provides 
information and support, and universities 
showcase their research via podcast. In 
an initiative described as “innovative and 
disruptive”, the Supreme Court of Victoria 
in Australia sought to make the justice 
system more transparent with Gertie’s 
Law, a popular podcast [for which the 
author was consulting producer] where 
judges discuss their work. 
In a world plagued with disinformation 
and mistrust of the media, the 
authenticity of podcasting oers 
unique opportunities – from long-form 
investigative storytelling and the pursuit 
of social justice to building transparency, 
trust and social inclusion. 
A writer, oral historian and podcaster, 
Siobhan McHugh is an Associate 
Professor of Journalism at the University 
of Wollongong, Australia. She has 
co-produced award-winning narrative 
podcasts including Phoebe’s Fall, Wrong 
Skin and The Last Voyage of the Pong Su.
