Kalpana Sharma
Independent journalist, columnist 
and author, based in Mumbai . The Silence 
and the Storm: Narratives of violence against 
women in India is her most recent book .
When you can spot the speck of a fishing 
boat on the horizon with your naked eye, 
you know that something has changed. 
The usual suffocating brown cloud has 
lifted. The air is clear. And the sky is a blue 
that you have forgotten.
The world has changed in 2020. A new 
coronavirus has literally knocked the air 
out of the world. Each day brings 
greater uncertainty, more news of death 
and infection, and increasing anxiety 
about jobs and the economy as we battle 
a disease that has no cure – yet.
Nothing can prepare you for the 
unexpected. But if there is one lesson 
to be learned, it is that those countries 
that invested in affordable and accessible 
health care are today best equipped 
to deal with an unexpected health crisis.
Given the nature of this new virus – 
contagious, deadly and swift – one would 
have expected nations, and people within 
nations, to come together to fight it. 
Instead, tragically, we have watched how 
COVID-19 has laid bare the existing fault-
lines in all our societies. 
Fault-lines exposed
At a time when a virus is not choosy about 
who it infects, our societies continue 
to discriminate against their own people 
on the basis of age-old entrenched 
attitudes towards the ‘other’ – be it people 
from another religion or another race. A 
pandemic cannot erase hate and prejudice; 
tragically, it tends to exacerbate them.
Another fault-line exposed is inequality. 
We can watch what the French economist 
Thomas Piketty terms “the violence 
of inequality” playing out in this crisis. 
Those at the bottom, without a safety net, 
are also the very people now struggling 
to stay afloat during this global pandemic. 
In India, this “violence of inequality” 
has played out in a heartbreakingly 
vivid manner in the spring of 2020, as 
a nation of 1.3 billion people was locked 
down to stem the spread of COVID-19. 
Thousands of men and women – left adrift 
in cities where they had migrated, looking 
for work and sustenance – lost their jobs 
when the economy ground to a halt. With 
no money or safety net, they were left 
with no alternative but to set out on foot, 
walking hundreds of kilometres to reach 
their homes in the countryside. 
They trudged in the heat, with little food 
and water. Some survived, but many died 
on the way. The images of this exodus 
of rural migrants are testimony to how 
The pandemic:   
Mirroring our fragilities
Social inequalities, gender violence, poor housing, failing health 
systems – the health crisis has exposed the fractures that divide our 
societies. To change the world, we will have to address challenges that 
we have not been able to face up to so far.  
The world 
has changed 
in 2020
 The announcement of a lockdown in India resulted in a mass exodus 
of migrant workers from the cities to their villages. New Delhi, March 2020. 

unjust patterns of economic development 
elevated their suffering in the event 
of such an emergency. 
The third fault-line that runs through every 
society, but jumps out at times of crisis, 
is that of gender. Women are “locked 
down” with their abusers, with few avenues 
of escape. Yet this phenomenon is not 
getting the attention it deserves. Could 
it be because this gross violation of the 
rights of millions of women across the world 
occurs even in so-called “normal” times?
Urban poverty
In many countries, COVID-19 has struck 
hardest in urban areas. The disease has 
spread rapidly among the urban poor, 
who live in congested, often unhygienic, 
conditions. The chances of the people 
living in such conditions surviving this 
pandemic are slim – given the poor public 
health facilities, especially in most poorer 
countries. 
These people literally hold up our cities 
–  the conservancy workers, those 
in the service industry, in construction, 
in small-scale industries, domestic help, 
caregivers, and many more. Most of them 
are poorly paid and live in dense urban 
poor settlements, where there is no 
running water and inadequate to non-
existent sanitation. 
In such settlements, the spread 
of COVID-19 cannot be controlled by 
way of physical distancing – because 
the urban poor have no space to escape 
each other. The lack of running water 
makes hygiene measures such as 
frequent hand-washing and disinfecting 
surfaces impossible.
 A man who was unable to return to his village observes the Ramadan fast, outside his shuttered shop in Old Delhi. 
There is little to indicate 
that things will not return 
to the old, profligate 
ways of living

© Anindito Mukherjee

Affordable housing has rarely been 
a priority in our cities. The consequence 
is what we are witnessing today. 
The overwhelming number of new 
infections have occurred in some 
of the most densely-packed and poorer 
parts of cities – whether in Mumbai 
or in New York.
A whiff of good news
And finally, coming back to clean air in our 
cities. The Global Energy Review 2020, 
the flagship report of the International 
Energy Agency (IEA) released in April, 
noted a record annual decline in carbon 
emissions of almost eight per cent this 
year. This is good news. Except that it is 
a fortunate fallout of an unfortunate crisis, 
and not the result of addressing the very 
real dangers of climate change.  
COVID-19 has changed many things, yet 
changed nothing. But once this crisis 
passes, there is little to indicate that things 
will not return to the old, profligate ways 
of living. We have seen little evidence 
of any concrete plans to permanently 
reorder our cities, for instance, so that 
the poor can live with dignity, or where 
eco-friendly public transport is prioritized. 
There are many challenges ahead, 
starting with the fundamental overhaul 
of our health-care systems. Countries, 
and states and provinces within 
countries, that have come out well 
in this crisis are those that have invested 
in quality public health. 
The second is addressing the embedded 
inequities in our societies. Even 
the best systems fail in an unequal 
society. This is a long-term project, 
for sure, and cannot be addressed 
overnight. Irrespective of whether 
we live in countries with strong or weak 
economies, if there is systemic inequality, 
it will manifest during crises – by 
killing those who are already impaired 
and vulnerable.
“The world has enough resources for 
everyone’s needs, but not for everyone’s 
greed,” Mahatma Gandhi once said. 
Yet, it is greed that has fuelled our 
economies – as borders and boundaries 
have lost relevance in the global fervour 
to satiate consumerist appetites. It has 
also threatened the future of the planet, 
as natural resources are devoured, never 
to be replaced. 
COVID-19 has compelled us to slow 
down. But as and when we succeed 
in overcoming this particular crisis, 
will we witness a new world order? 
Will we recognize the precarious existence 
of millions among us? Will we hear 
the voices of the women, and the most 
vulnerable, once the noise of business-as-
usual begins?
There are no easy answers. But we can, 
and must, ask. And, perhaps, hope.
 Connaught Place, the commercial centre at the heart of New Delhi, is deserted on Day 1 of India’s lockdown. 
