A wide social network is of great 
importance for the future of radio 
stations. Even if the fans’ network does 
not generate a tangible economic value 
like radio audiences do, it generates a 
signicant amount of reputational capital. 
The crisis in traditional mass advertising 
will lead to a future increase and rening 
of tools for the capitalization of the 
wealth of these networked audiences. 
Citizen reporters
While social media has helped to extend 
the reach of radio, it has also made it 
possible to give listeners a voice outside 
broadcast times. At major political and 
social events, listeners can now transform 
into citizen reporters – using their 
smartphones to make audio and video 
recordings, and sending them to radio 
stations, or sharing them via Twitter or 
YouTube. 
In fact, listeners have become full-
edged contributors to their radio 
stations. In Italy, the public service 
station Rai Radio 3 has built a large 
audience of followers on Twitter, who 
comment actively and passionately on 
its programmes. During the station’s 
classic press review each morning, a 
listener volunteers to live-tweet all the 
news he or she hears, so that those who 
are not listening in have continuous 
access to all the news of the day.
In France, Emilie Mazoyer, who used to be 
a host on the youth-oriented public radio 
station, Mouv' (she now works for Europe 
1), co-created a music playlist, Tweet-Liste, 
together with her listeners and followers 
on Twitter, in 2011.
Listeners can now send audio 
messages recorded on WhatsApp, the 
free messaging service, to stations. 
Social media networks now make it possible for radio audiences 
to comment on, and even inuence, radio programming. But this 
citizen participation and seemingly innocuous interaction comes 
at a price – it allows large technology companies to collect lucrative 
data on our behaviours. 
Radio hosts then lter, select, curate and 
edit these contents before including 
them into the ow of their programmes. 
One Italian public service radio show 
even gathered life stories from their 
listeners through social media and turned 
them into a docu-ction series. From 
2015 to 2019, Rai Radio 2 aired Pascal, 
a programme which asked listeners to 
contribute true stories, based on their 
own lives. The stories were peer-reviewed, 
curated, and turned into brief docu-
ction episodes. 
Listeners are more articulate today and 
“noisier” than in the past, producing more 
content than ever in the form of audio, 
video and text messages. But increased 
audience and citizen participation in 
radio production comes at a price. 
Intensied datacation
This combination of radio and social 
media has also led to greater audience 
datacation. This is essentially an 
intensication of the process of collecting 
information on radio listeners who 
connect via social networks. All the 
content that is collected is measured and 
analysed, and then turned into a valuable 
dataset for the predictive analysis of 
user behaviour. 
While in the past, it was the attention of 
listeners that was commodied and sold 
to advertisers, today it is the user data and 
content that have become commodities. 
This data represents a valuable asset for 
social network owners, especially since it 
is acquired at no cost – listeners are not 
compensated for the value they produce 
for the tech companies that own these 
platforms. And radio stations have no 
access to this data either. 
Tiziano Bonini
“The crucial failure of radio has been to 
perpetuate the fundamental separation 
between radio producers and their 
audiences, a separation that is at odds 
with its technological basis [...] audiences 
must be transformed into witnesses in 
interviews and conversations and must 
have the opportunity to be heard”.
Walter Benjamin, the German philosopher 
and literary critic wrote these words in 
1930, conceiving radio as a tool to bridge 
the distance between the radio host and 
the listener. More than seventy years later, 
his words could perfectly describe what 
has happened to radio with the advent of 
social media. 
Today, a radio station's audience must 
be understood as the sum of its listeners 
and those who follow it on social 
networks. While the rst kind of audience 
still receives radio in a traditional way, 
members of the second set are connected 
to each other and to the host within a 
network. The intersection of radio and 
social media heavily modies both the 
vertical relationship between the host 
and the audience, and the horizontal 
relationship between individual listeners.
The network of friends/fans of a radio 
programme on Facebook, for example, 
constitutes its specic social capital. 
While the FM or digital radio audience, 
measured through traditional audience 
rating systems, constitutes the economic 
capital of the station, the social media 
audience represents its true social capital 
– one that is very ‘tangible’ and visible. 
Radio audiences:
More vocal 
than ever before 

Radio: Stronger and more vibrant than ever            15 
Today more and more of us listen to 
the radio on smartphones, streaming 
devices and computers – and all our 
interactions take place through a 
keyboard or touch screen. Listening 
to radio content is no longer just an 
aural or visual activity. It is increasingly 
haptic – we touch the screen multiple 
times to open an app, access schedules, 
and to tune in to a station to listen 
to our favourite radio shows, live or 
on demand. 
Each of these tactile activities generates 
a new mass of data that is extremely 
lucrative for social media platforms. The 
boundaries between the benets of 
the emotional involvement that radio 
continues to oer and the exploitation 
of this connection by social media, are 
getting increasingly blurred. While we 
create new bonds with other listeners 
of the same radio programme on social 
networks, we are also commodied, and 
our passion for radio is converted into a 
goldmine for others. 
The aective data – comments, 
emotional states, emoticons, likes – 
that we produce on social media are 
all indicators of our future behaviours. 
It is also for this reason that today, more 
than ever in the past, public service 
radio and community stations are once 
again important, allowing a public 
involvement that is still authentic and 
outside the circuits of commodication.
A lecturer in Media Studies at the 
Department of Social, Political and 
Cognitive Sciences at the University of 
Siena, Italy, Tiziano Bonini’s current 
research interests are the intersection 
between radio, the internet and 
social media. 
While in the past, 
it was the attention 
of listeners that 
was commodified, 
today it is the user 
data and content 
that have become 
commodities 
