Diomma Dramé
Journalist and health researcher at 
the French-language website of Africa 
Check, based in Dakar, Senegal .  
The non-profit is Africa’s first independent 
fact-checking organization .
COVID-19, an unknown disease till 2020, 
has caused an unprecedented global 
health crisis. Many questions about 
this new virus still remain unanswered 
by scientists – including  the nature 
of immunity of those who have been 
infected, the seasonality of the virus, 
and its capacity to mutate. Our lack 
of knowledge about this disease and its 
evolution have fuelled a thirst for 
information, in Africa and elsewhere. It has 
also led to the proliferation of rumours, 
fake news and disinformation – with social 
media networks serving as sounding-
boards.   
The French-language office of Africa 
Check has been working to combat 
disinformation since the beginning of the 
outbreak. Using specialists and researchers 
to fact-check and verify stories, the Dakar-
based website has published around fifty 
articles relating to COVID-19. 
In the absence of effective treatments 
for the disease, articles and messages 
about purported miracle cures have 
proliferated. Following research and claims 
by a French physician and infectious 
diseases specialist, Didier Raoult, on 
the use of hydroxychloroquine as a cure 
for COVID-19, information spread through 
WhatsApp and Twitter in several West 
African countries that the leaves of the 
neem tree contained chloroquine. 
This sparked a mad rush for these leaves. 
However, the quinine derivative does not 
come from a plant, but is obtained through 
chemical synthesis. Similarly, black tea, 
pepper soup, vitamin C, and garlic have 
been put forward on social media as foods 
that help prevent or cure the disease. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has 
refuted these claims.   
Conspiracy theories
At the same time, the epidemic has led 
to the dissemination of images and videos 
that have been manipulated or taken out 
of context. Some of these have alleged, 
for example, that  vaccination campaigns 
could be forced, and are actually designed 
to spread the virus. Others seek to spread 
discrimination, targeting Chinese nationals 
in particular. A video showing the burning 
of a building containing shops in Ibadan, 
the capital of Oyo State in Nigeria, was 
wrongly portrayed as a reprisal against 
its Chinese owner. But a tweet from 
Fertile ground 
for disinformation
Disinformation and conspiracy theories have proliferated on social 
media during the pandemic. Black tea, neem leaves and pepper 
soup have been touted as miracle cures for COVID-19, in Africa 
and elsewhere. To combat this infodemic, digital platforms must 
be made more accountable, fake news tracked and called out, 
and media literacy developed. 

the Oyo State government clarified 
that the building was in fact owned by 
a Nigerian, and eighty per cent of those 
employed there were Nigerian. 
In a spurious attempt to explain 
the emergence of the pandemic and its 
spread, stories of a Western conspiracy 
against Africa have been circulated by 
internet users across the continent. This 
was done, in particular, by hijacking 
the words of United Nations Secretary-
General António Guterres, who warned 
in an interview with Radio France 
Internationale (RFI) on 27 March 2020 
that COVID-19 could kill millions in Africa 
if  immediate action was not taken. The 
theory of a vaccine funded by the Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation to control 
African populations also spread like 
wildfire. This information is not only 
blatantly false, it is deliberately designed 
to mislead.  
The circulation of rumours and their 
consequences is not specific 
to the coronavirus crisis. In 2014, fake 
news provoked resistance to the response 
strategy to combat the Ebola virus in some 
of the affected countries.  
In an article, “The ‘exceptionality’ of Ebola 
and popular ‘reticences’ in Guinea-
Conakry,” published in 2015 in the journal 
Anthropologie & Santé, Sylvain Landry 
Faye explains that the first cases of deaths 
due to the virus in the same family had 
been interpreted as a sign of mystical 
punishment, or a curse brought on 
by committing a theft or adultery. 
These rumours fuelled beliefs that 
the disease was not real – making 
communities develop attitudes that 
rejected the response strategy put 
in place by the state and its partners 
to stem the epidemic. Other rumours 
portrayed Ebola Treatment Centres (ETCs) 
as contamination sites – places of death 
where bodies and organs were being 
trafficked. 
Filling a void
In the case of coronavirus, social media 
and apps like Facebook, Messenger, 
and WhatsApp have given fake news an 
unprecedented impact. Besides providing 
global access to information, these 
platforms also allow their users to add 
or produce material, and circulate it in 
record time. Posted on 20 April 2020, 
the video on the Ibadan fire had been 
shared over 380,000 times three days later. 
Other factors have also encouraged 
the circulation of rumours and fake news. 
In Senegal, for example, the traditional 
media’s focus on the number of people 
infected by COVID-19 and messages 
about the best way to prevent the spread 
of the virus did not fully satisfy the needs 
of citizens – who were looking for more 
positive news on possible treatments. So 
social media networks were employed 
to fill this void.  
Fake news, which usually circulates 
in groups or circles of like-minded 
individuals, is easily  consumed 
and considered to be “well-sourced” 
information. Voice messages and texts 
are often attributed to personalities, 
authorities or hospital service providers 
– who use their false authority to offer 
simple solutions, like regularly drinking 
hot or salty water to disinfect the throat. 
So-called religious leaders can also play 
this role. 
It is not always easy for the ordinary 
citizen to distinguish between information 
from traditional media – which follows 
the rigours of news collection, processing, 
and verification – and information 
available via social media, even when 
this is clearly inaccurate or misleading. 
The desire to believe – especially in times 
of crisis – can outweigh the desire to be 
informed. 
Social media has 
given fake news an 
unprecedented impact

Developing critical 
thinking 
The avalanche of fake news on social 
media, which the WHO has labelled 
an infodemic, has prompted digital 
platforms to launch an offensive to curb 
the viral spread of false information. 
This is done by promoting content 
from official sources, or banning 
advertisements touting miracle cures. 
Journalists specialized in fact-checking, 
like those at  Africa Check and other fact-
checking websites around the world, 
work hard to correct facts and guarantee 
reliable sources of information. 
However, these efforts to stem 
the deluge of misinformation are 
clearly not enough. In May, the UN 
launched Verified, a global campaign 
which will create a cadre of “digital first 
responders” to share compelling, clear 
and accurate information about the crisis, 
and raise awareness about the risks 
of misinformation.  
In 2019, Facebook launched a new 
flagging tool, allowing Instagram users 
to flag posts that they think contain 
fake news. It might also be a good 
idea to involve influential social media 
bloggers to raise awareness and train 
their administrators and moderators 
to combat false news.  
Successful initiatives can be replicated. 
One example is Wa FM, an internet radio 
station set up in March 2020 to fight 
fake news on COVID-19 in Côte d’Ivoire. 
Broadcast primarily on Whatsapp, 
it relies on a network of around 
200 volunteer journalists who walk 
the streets of Yopougon, a working-class 
neighbourhood in Abidjan – cross-
checking information to correct fake 
news on social media, and to educate 
and raise people’s awareness. 
To combat fake news, it is necessary to use 
the same channels that disseminate 
and feed it. In Africa and elsewhere, 
it is also necessary to encourage 
critical thinking in citizens, regarding 
the information they receive. This could 
be done by encouraging them to question  
information sources and the identity 
of the authors. Without this kind of media 
education, conspiracy theories and fake 
news will continue to spread unchecked. 
The desire to believe, 
especially in times of crisis, 
can outweigh the desire 
to be informed
